<Title: The Adventures of Ulysses>
<Author: Charles Lamb>
<publication date: 1808>
<Page numbers: no>
<Source: Project Gutenberg >
<text>
<PREFACE
This work is designed as a supplement to the Adventures of Telemachus. It
treats of the conduct and sufferings of Ulysses, the father of Telemachus.
The picture which it exhibits is that of a brave man struggling with
adversity; by a wise use of events, and with an inimitable presence of
mind under difficulties, forcing out a way for himself through the
severest trials to which human life can be exposed; with enemies natural
and preternatural surrounding him on all sides. The agents in this tale,
besides men and women, are giants, enchanters, sirens: things which denote
external force or internal temptations, the twofold danger which a wise
fortitude must expect to encounter in its course through this world. The
fictions contained in it will be found to comprehend some of the most
admired inventions of Grecian mythology.
The groundwork of the story is as old as the Odyssey, but the moral and
the coloring are comparatively modern. By avoiding the prolixity which
marks the speeches and the descriptions in Homer, I have gained a rapidity
to the narration which I hope will make it more attractive and give it
more the air of a romance to young readers, though I am sensible that by
the curtailment I have sacrificed in many places the manners to the
passion, the subordinate characteristics to the essential interest of the
story. The attempt is not to be considered as seeking a comparison with
any of the direct translations of the Odyssey, either in prose or verse,
though if I were to state the obligations which I have had to one obsolete
version, [Footnote: The translation of Homer by Chapman in the reign of
James I.] I should run the hazard of depriving myself of the very slender
degree of reputation which I could hope to acquire from a trifle like the
present undertaking.>

<chapter title="CHAPTER ONE">
The Cicons.--The Fruit of the Lotos-tree.--Polyphemus and the Cyclops.--
The Kingdom of the Winds, and God Aeolus's Fatal Present.--The
Laestrygonian Man-eaters.
This history tells of the wanderings of Ulysses and his followers in their
return from Troy, after the destruction of that famous city of Asia by the
Grecians. He was inflamed with a desire of seeing again, after a ten
years' absence, his wife and native country, Ithaca. He was king of a
barren spot, and a poor country in comparison of the fruitful plains of
Asia, which he was leaving, or the wealthy kingdoms which he touched upon
in his return; yet, wherever he came, he could never see a soil which
appeared in his eyes half so sweet or desirable as his country earth. This
made him refuse the offers of the goddess Calypso to stay with her, and
partake of her immortality in the delightful island; and this gave him
strength to break from the enchantments of Circe, the daughter of the Sun.
From Troy, ill winds cast Ulysses and his fleet upon the coast of the
Cicons, a people hostile to the Grecians. Landing his forces, he laid
siege to their chief city, Ismarus, which he took, and with it much spoil,
and slew many people. But success proved fatal to him; for his soldiers,
elated with the spoil, and the good store of provisions which they found
in that place, fell to eating and drinking, forgetful of their safety,
till the Cicons, who inhabited the coast, had time to assemble their
friends and allies from the interior; who, mustering in prodigious force,
set upon the Grecians, while they negligently revelled and feasted, and
slew many of them, and recovered the spoil. They, dispirited and thinned
in their numbers, with difficulty made their retreat good to the ships.
Thence they set sail, sad at heart, yet something cheered that with such
fearful odds against them they had not all been utterly destroyed. A
dreadful tempest ensued, which for two nights and two days tossed them
about, but the third day the weather cleared, and they had hopes of a
favourable gale to carry them to Ithaca; but, as they doubled the Cape of
Malea, suddenly a north wind arising drove them back as far as Cythera.
After that, for the space of nine days, contrary winds continued to drive
them in an opposite direction to the point to which they were bound, and
the tenth day they put in at a shore where a race of men dwell that are
sustained by the fruit of the lotos-tree. Here Ulysses sent some of his
men to land for fresh water, who were met by certain of the inhabitants,
that gave them some of their country food to eat--not with any ill
intention towards them, though in the event it proved pernicious; for,
having eaten of this fruit, so pleasant it proved to their appetite that
they in a minute quite forgot all thoughts of home, or of their
countrymen, or of ever returning back to the ships to give an account of
what sort of inhabitants dwelt there, but they would needs stay and live
there among them, and eat of that precious food forever; and when Ulysses
sent other of his men to look for them, and to bring them back by force,
they strove, and wept, and would not leave their food for heaven itself,
so much the pleasure of that enchanting fruit had bewitched them. But
Ulysses caused them to be bound hand and foot, and cast under the hatches;
and set sail with all possible speed from that baneful coast, lest others
after them might taste the lotos, which had such strange qualities to make
men forget their native country and the thoughts of home.
Coasting on all that night by unknown and out-of-the-way shores, they came
by daybreak to the land where the Cyclops dwell, a sort of giant shepherds
that neither sow nor plough, but the earth untilled produces for them rich
wheat and barley and grapes, yet they have neither bread nor wine, nor
know the arts of cultivation, nor care to know them; for they live each
man to himself, without law or government, or anything like a state or
kingdom; but their dwellings are in caves, on the steep heads of
mountains; every man's household governed by his own caprice, or not
governed at all; their wives and children as lawless as themselves, none
caring for others, but each doing as he or she thinks good. Ships or boats
they have none, nor artificers to make them, no trade or commerce, or wish
to visit other shores; yet they have convenient places for harbours and
for shipping. Here Ulysses with a chosen party of twelve followers landed,
to explore what sort of men dwelt there, whether hospitable and friendly
to strangers, or altogether wild and savage, for as yet no dwellers
appeared in sight.
The first sign of habitation which they came to was a giant's cave rudely
fashioned, but of a size which betokened the vast proportions of its
owner; the pillars which supported it being the bodies of huge oaks or
pines, in the natural state of the tree, and all about showed more marks
of strength than skill in whoever built it. Ulysses, entering it, admired
the savage contrivances and artless structure of the place, and longed to
see the tenant of so outlandish a mansion; but well conjecturing that
gifts would have more avail in extracting courtesy than strength would
succeed in forcing it, from such a one as he expected to find the
inhabitant, he resolved to flatter his hospitality with a present of Greek
wine, of which he had store in twelve great vessels, so strong that no one
ever drank it without an infusion of twenty parts of water to one of wine,
yet the fragrance of it even then so delicious that it would have vexed a
man who smelled it to abstain from tasting it; but whoever tasted it, it
was able to raise his courage to the height of heroic deeds. Taking with
them a goat-skin flagon full of this precious liquor, they ventured into
the recesses of the cave. Here they pleased themselves a whole day with
beholding the giant's kitchen, where the flesh of sheep and goats lay
strewed; his dairy, where goat-milk stood ranged in troughs and pails; his
pens, where he kept his live animals; but those he had driven forth to
pasture with him when he went out in the morning. While they were feasting
their eyes with a sight of these curiosities, their ears were suddenly
deafened with a noise like the falling of a house. It was the owner of the
cave, who had been abroad all day feeding his flock, as his custom was, in
the mountains, and now drove them home in the evening from pasture. He
threw down a pile of fire-wood, which he had been gathering against
supper-time, before the mouth of the cave, which occasioned the crash they
heard. The Grecians hid themselves in the remote parts of the cave at
sight of the uncouth monster. It was Polyphemus, the largest and savagest
of the Cyclops, who boasted himself to be the son of Neptune. He looked
more like a mountain crag than a man, and to his brutal body he had a
brutish mind answerable. He drove his flock, all that gave milk, to the
interior of the cave, but left the rams and the he-goats without. Then
taking up a stone so massy that twenty oxen could not have drawn it, he
placed it at the mouth of the cave, to defend the entrance, and sat him
down to milk his ewes and his goats; which done, he lastly kindled a fire,
and throwing his great eye round the cave (for the Cyclops have no more
than one eye, and that placed in the midst of their forehead), by the
glimmering light he discerned some of Ulysses's men.
"Ho! guests, what are you? Merchants or wandering thieves?" he bellowed
out in a voice which took from them all power of reply, it was so
astounding.
Only Ulysses summoned resolution to answer, that they came neither for
plunder nor traffic, but were Grecians who had lost their way, returning
from Troy; which famous city, under the conduct of Agamemnon, the renowned
son of Atreus, they had sacked, and laid level with the ground. Yet now
they prostrated themselves humbly before his feet, whom they acknowledged
to be mightier than they, and besought him that he would bestow the rites
of hospitality upon them, for that Jove was the avenger of wrongs done to
strangers, and would fiercely resent any injury which they might suffer.
"Fool!" said the Cyclop, "to come so far to preach to me the fear of the
gods. We Cyclops care not for your Jove, whom you fable to be nursed by a
goat, nor any of your blessed ones. We are stronger than they, and dare
bid open battle to Jove himself, though you and all your fellows of the
earth join with him." And he bade them tell him where their ship was in
which they came, and whether they had any companions. But Ulysses, with a
wise caution, made answer that they had no ship or companions, but were
unfortunate men, whom the sea, splitting their ship in pieces, had dashed
upon his coast, and they alone had escaped. He replied nothing, but
gripping two of the nearest of them, as if they had been no more than
children, he dashed their brains out against the earth, and, shocking to
relate, tore in pieces their limbs, and devoured them yet warm and
trembling, making a lion's meal of them, lapping the blood; for the
Cyclops are _man-eaters_, and esteem human flesh to be a delicacy far
above goat's or kid's; though by reason of their abhorred customs few men
approach their coast, except some stragglers, or now and then a
shipwrecked mariner. At a sight so horrid, Ulysses and his men were like
distracted people. He, when he had made an end of his wicked supper,
drained a draught of goat's milk down his prodigious throat, and lay down
and slept among his goats. Then Ulysses drew his sword, and half resolved
to thrust it with all his might in at the bosom of the sleeping monster;
but wiser thoughts restrained him, else they had there without help all
perished, for none but Polyphemus himself could have removed that mass of
stone which he had placed to guard the entrance. So they were constrained
to abide all that night in fear.
When day came the Cyclop awoke, and kindling a fire, made his breakfast of
two other of his unfortunate prisoners, then milked his goats as he was
accustomed, and pushing aside the vast stone, and shutting it again when
he had done upon the prisoners, with as much ease as a man opens and shuts
a quiver's lid, he let out his flock, and drove them before him with
whistlings (as sharp as winds in storms) to the mountains.
Then Ulysses, of whose strength or cunning the Cyclop seems to have had as
little heed as of an infant's, being left alone, with the remnant of his
men which the Cyclop had not devoured, gave manifest proof how far manly
wisdom excels brutish force. He chose a stake from among the wood which
the Cyclop had piled up for firing, in length and thickness like a mast,
which he sharpened and hardened in the fire, and selected four men, and
instructed them what they should do with this stake, and made them perfect
in their parts.
When the evening was come, the Cyclop drove home his sheep; and as fortune
directed it, either of purpose, or that his memory was overruled by the
gods to his hurt (as in the issue it proved), he drove the males of his
flock, contrary to his custom, along with the dams into the pens. Then
shutting-to the stone of the cave, he fell to his horrible supper. When he
had despatched two more of the Grecians, Ulysses waxed bold with the
contemplation of his project, and took a bowl of Greek wine, and merrily
dared the Cyclop to drink.
[Illustration: _'Cyclop,' he said, 'take a bowl of wine from the hand of
your guest.'_]
"Cyclop," he said, "take a bowl of wine from the hand of your guest: it
may serve to digest the man's flesh that you have eaten, and show what
drink our ship held before it went down. All I ask in recompense, if you
find it good, is to be dismissed in a whole skin. Truly you must look to
have few visitors, if you observe this new custom of eating your guests."
The brute took and drank, and vehemently enjoyed the taste of wine, which
was new to him, and swilled again at the flagon, and entreated for more,
and prayed Ulysses to tell him his name, that he might bestow a gift upon
the man who had given him such brave liquor. The Cyclops, he said, had
grapes, but this rich juice, he swore, was simply divine. Again Ulysses
plied him with the wine, and the fool drank it as fast as he poured out,
and again he asked the name of his benefactor, which Ulysses, cunningly
dissembling, said, "My name is Noman: my kindred and friends in my own
country call me Noman."
"Then," said the Cyclop, "this is the kindness I will show thee, Noman: I
will eat thee last of all thy friends." He had scarce expressed his savage
kindness, when the fumes of the strong wine overcame him, and he reeled
down upon the floor and sank into a dead sleep.
Ulysses watched his time, while the monster lay insensible, and,
heartening up his men, they placed the sharp end of the stake in the fire
till it was heated red-hot, and some god gave them a courage beyond that
which they were used to have, and the four men with difficulty bored the
sharp end of the huge stake, which they had heated red-hot, right into the
eye of the drunken cannibal, and Ulysses helped to thrust it in with all
his might, still farther and farther, with effort, as men bore with an
auger, till the scalded blood gushed out, and the eye-ball smoked, and the
strings of the eye cracked, as the burning rafter broke in it, and the eye
hissed, as hot iron hisses when it is plunged into water.
He, waking, roared with the pain so loud that all the cavern broke into
claps like thunder. They fled, and dispersed into corners. He plucked the
burning stake from his eye, and hurled the wood madly about the cave. Then
he cried out with a mighty voice for his brethren the Cyclops, that dwelt
hard by in caverns upon hills; they, hearing the terrible shout, came
flocking from all parts to inquire, What ailed Polyphemus? and what cause
he had for making such horrid clamours in the night-time to break their
sleeps? if his fright proceeded from any mortal? if strength or craft had
given him his death's blow? He made answer from within that Noman had hurt
him, Noman had killed him, Noman was with him in the cave. They replied,
"If no man has hurt thee, and no man is with thee, then thou art alone,
and the evil that afflicts thee is from the hand of Heaven, which none can
resist or help." So they left him and went their way, thinking that some
disease troubled him. He, blind and ready to split with the anguish of the
pain, went groaning up and down in the dark, to find the doorway, which
when he found, he removed the stone, and sat in the threshold, feeling if
he could lay hold on any man going out with the sheep, which (the day now
breaking) were beginning to issue forth to their accustomed pastures. But
Ulysses, whose first artifice in giving himself that ambiguous name had
succeeded so well with the Cyclop, was not of a wit so gross to be caught
by that palpable device. But casting about in his mind all the ways which
he could contrive for escape (no less than all their lives depending on
the success), at last he thought of this expedient. He made knots of the
osier twigs upon which the Cyclop commonly slept; with which he tied the
fattest and fleeciest of the rams together, three in a rank, and under the
belly of the middle ram he tied a man, and himself last, wrapping himself
fast with both his hands in the rich wool of one, the fairest of the
flock.
And now the sheep began to issue forth very fast; the males went first,
the females, unmilked, stood by, bleating and requiring the hand of their
shepherd in vain to milk them, their full bags sore with being unemptied,
but he much sorer with the loss of sight. Still, as the males passed, he
felt the backs of those fleecy fools, never dreaming that they carried his
enemies under their bellies; so they passed on till the last ram came
loaded with his wool and Ulysses together. He stopped that ram and felt
him, and had his hand once in the hair of Ulysses, yet knew it not, and he
chid the ram for being last, and spoke to it as if it understood him, and
asked it whether it did not wish that its master had his eye again, which
that abominable Noman with his execrable rout had put out, when they had
got him down with wine; and he willed the ram to tell him whereabouts in
the cave his enemy lurked, that he might dash his brains and strew them
about, to ease his heart of that tormenting revenge which rankled in it.
After a deal of such foolish talk to the beast, he let it go.
When Ulysses found himself free, he let go his hold, and assisted in
disengaging his friends. The rams which had befriended them they carried
off with them to the ships, where their companions with tears in their
eyes received them, as men escaped from death. They plied their oars, and
set their sails, and when they were got as far off from shore as a voice
could reach, Ulysses cried out to the Cyclop: "Cyclop, thou shouldst not
have so much abused thy monstrous strength, as to devour thy guests. Jove
by my hand sends thee requital to pay thy savage inhumanity." The Cyclop
heard, and came forth enraged, and in his anger he plucked a fragment of a
rock, and threw it with blind fury at the ships. It narrowly escaped
lighting upon the bark in which Ulysses sat, but with the fall it raised
so fierce an ebb as bore back the ship till it almost touched the shore.
"Cyclop," said Ulysses, "if any ask thee who imposed on thee that
unsightly blemish in thine eye, say it was Ulysses, son of Laertes: the
king of Ithaca am I called, the waster of cities." Then they crowded sail,
and beat the old sea, and forth they went with a forward gale; sad for
fore-past losses, yet glad to have escaped at any rate; till they came to
the isle where Aeolus reigned, who is god of the winds.
Here Ulysses and his men were courteously received by the monarch, who
showed him his twelve children which have rule over the twelve winds. A
month they stayed and feasted with him, and at the end of the month he
dismissed them with many presents, and gave to Ulysses at parting an ox's
hide, in which were enclosed _all the winds_: only he left abroad the
western wind, to play upon their sails and waft them gently home to
Ithaca. This bag, bound in a glittering silver band so close that no
breath could escape, Ulysses hung up at the mast. His companions did not
know its contents, but guessed that the monarch had given to him some
treasures of gold or silver.
Nine days they sailed smoothly, favoured by the western wind, and by the
tenth they approached so nigh as to discern lights kindled on the shores
of their country earth: when, by ill-fortune, Ulysses, overcome with
fatigue of watching the helm, fell asleep. The mariners seized the
opportunity, and one of them said to the rest, "A fine time has this
leader of ours; wherever he goes he is sure of presents, when we come away
empty-handed; and see what King Aeolus has given him, store no doubt of
gold and silver." A word was enough to those covetous wretches, who quick
as thought untied the bag, and, instead of gold, out rushed with mighty
noise _all the winds_.
[Illustration: _Out rushed with mighty noise all the winds_.]
Ulysses with the noise awoke, and saw their mistake, but too late, for the
ship was driving with all the winds back far from Ithaca, far as to the
island of Aeolus from which they had parted, in one hour measuring back
what in nine days they had scarcely tracked, and in sight of home too! Up
he flew amazed, and, raving, doubted whether he should not fling himself
into the sea for grief of his bitter disappointment. At last he hid
himself under the hatches for shame. And scarce could he be prevailed
upon, when he was told he was arrived again in the harbour of King Aeolus,
to go himself or send to that monarch for a second succour; so much the
disgrace of having misused his royal bounty (though it was the crime of
his followers, and not his own) weighed upon him; and when at last he
went, and took a herald with him, and came where the god sat on his
throne, feasting with his children, he would not thrust in among them at
their meat, but set himself down like one unworthy in the threshold.
Indignation seized Aeolus to behold him in that manner returned; and he
said, "Ulysses, what has brought you back? Are you so soon tired of your
country; or did not our present please you? We thought we had given you a
kingly passport."  Ulysses made answer: "My men have done this ill
mischief to me; they did it while I slept." "Wretch!" said Aeolus,
"avaunt, and quit our shores: it fits not us to convoy men whom the gods
hate, and will have perish."
Forth they sailed, but with far different hopes than when they left the
same harbour the first time with all the winds confined, only the west
wind suffered to play upon their sails to waft them in gentle murmurs to
Ithaca. They were now the sport of every gale that blew, and despaired of
ever seeing home more. Now those covetous mariners were cured of their
surfeit for gold, and would not have touched it if it had lain in untold
heaps before them.
Six days and nights they drove along, and on the seventh day they put into
Lamos, a port of the Laestrygonians. So spacious this harbour was that it
held with ease all their fleet, which rode at anchor, safe from any
storms, all but the ship in which Ulysses was embarked. He, as if
prophetic of the mischance which followed, kept still without the harbour,
making fast his bark to a rock at the land's point, which he climbed with
purpose to survey the country. He saw a city with smoke ascending from the
roofs, but neither ploughs going, nor oxen yoked, nor any sign of
agricultural works. Making choice of two men, he sent them to the city to
explore what sort of inhabitants dwelt there. His messengers had not gone
far before they met a damsel, of stature surpassing human, who was coming
to draw water from a spring. They asked her who dwelt in that land. She
made no reply, but led them in silence to her father's palace. He was a
monarch, and named Antiphas. He and all his people were giants. When they
entered the palace, a woman, the mother of the damsel, but far taller than
she, rushed abroad and called for Antiphas. He came, and snatching up one
of the two men, made as if he would devour him. The other fled. Antiphas
raised a mighty shout, and instantly, this way and that, multitudes of
gigantic people issued out at the gates, and, making for the harbour, tore
up huge pieces of the rocks and flung them at the ships which lay there,
all which they utterly overwhelmed and sank; and the unfortunate bodies of
men which floated, and which the sea did not devour, these cannibals
thrust through with harpoons, like fishes, and bore them off to their dire
feast. Ulysses with his single bark, that had never entered the harbour,
escaped; that bark which was now the only vessel left of all the gallant
navy that had set sail with him from Troy. He pushed off from the shore,
cheering the sad remnant of his men, whom horror at the sight of their
countrymen's fate had almost turned to marble.
</chapter>
<chapter title="CHAPTER TWO">
The House of Circe.--Men changed into Beasts.--The Voyage to Hell.--The
Banquet of the Dead.
On went the single ship till it came to the island of Aeaea, where Circe,
the dreadful daughter of the Sun, dwelt. She was deeply skilled in magic,
a haughty beauty, and had hair like the Sun. The Sun was her parent, and
begot her and her brother Aeaetes (such another as herself) upon Perse,
daughter to Oceanus.
Here a dispute arose among Ulysses's men, which of them should go ashore
and explore the country; for there was a necessity that some should go to
procure water and provisions, their stock of both being nigh spent; but
their hearts failed them when they called to mind the shocking fate of
their fellows whom the Laestrygonians had eaten, and those which the foul
Cyclop Polyphemus had crushed between his jaws; which moved them so
tenderly in the recollection that they wept. But tears never yet supplied
any man's wants; this Ulysses knew full well, and dividing his men (all
that were left) into two companies, at the head of one of which was
himself, and at the head of the other Eurylochus, a man of tried courage,
he cast lots which of them should go up into the country, and the lot fell
upon Eurylochus and his company, two-and-twenty in number, who took their
leave, with tears, of Ulysses and his men that stayed, whose eyes wore the
same wet badges of weak humanity, for they surely thought never to see
these their companions again, but that on every coast where they should
come they should find nothing but savages and cannibals.
Eurylochus and his party proceeded up the country, till in a dale they
descried the house of Circe, built of bright stone, by the roadside.
Before her gate lay many beasts, as wolves, lions, leopards, which, by her
art, of wild, she had rendered tame. These arose when they saw strangers,
and ramped upon their hinder paws, and fawned upon Eurylochus and his men,
who dreaded the effects of such monstrous kindness; and staying at the
gate they heard the enchantress within, sitting at her loom, singing such
strains as suspended all mortal faculties, while she wove a web, subtile
and glorious, and of texture inimitable on earth, as all the housewiferies
of the deities are. Strains so ravishingly sweet provoked even the sagest
and prudentest heads among the party to knock and call at the gate. The
shining gate the enchantress opened, and bade them come in and feast. They
unwise followed, all but Eurylochus, who stayed without the gate,
suspicious that some train was laid for them. Being entered, she placed
them in chairs of state, and set before them meal and honey, and Smyrna
wine, but mixed with baneful drugs of powerful enchantment. When they had
eaten of these, and drunk of her cup, she touched them with her
charming-rod, and straight they were transformed into swine, having the
bodies of swine, the bristles, and snout, and grunting noise of that
animal; only they still retained the minds of men, which made them the
more to lament their brutish transformation. Having changed them, she
shut them up in her sty with many more whom her wicked sorceries had
formerly changed, and gave them swine's food--mast, and acorns, and
chestnuts--to eat.
[Illustration: _And straight they were transformed into swine_.]
Eurylochus, who beheld nothing of these sad changes from where he was
stationed without the gate, only instead of his companions that entered
(who he thought had all vanished by witchcraft) beheld a herd of swine,
hurried back to the ship, to give an account of what he had seen; but so
frighted and perplexed, that he could give no distinct report of anything,
only he remembered a palace, and a woman singing at her work, and gates
guarded by lions. But his companions, he said, were all vanished.
Then Ulysses, suspecting some foul witchcraft, snatched his sword and his
bow, and commanded Eurylochus instantly to lead him to the place. But
Eurylochus fell down, and, embracing his knees, besought him by the name
of a man whom the gods had in their protection, not to expose his safety,
and the safety of them all, to certain destruction.
"Do thou then stay, Eurylochus," answered Ulysses: "eat thou and drink in
the ship in safety; while I go alone upon this adventure: necessity, from
whose law is no appeal, compels me."
So saying, he quitted the ship and went on shore, accompanied by none;
none had the hardihood to offer to partake that perilous adventure with
him, so much they dreaded the enchantments of the witch. Singly he pursued
his journey till he came to the shining gates which stood before her
mansion; but when he essayed to put his foot over her threshold, he was
suddenly stopped by the apparition of a young man, bearing a golden rod in
his hand, who was the god Mercury. He held Ulysses by the wrist, to stay
his entrance; and "Whither wouldest thou go?" he said, "O thou most erring
of the sons of men! knowest thou not that this is the house of great
Circe, where she keeps thy friends in a loathsome sty, changed from the
fair forms of men into the detestable and ugly shapes of swine? art thou
prepared to share their fate, from which nothing can ransom thee?" But
neither his words nor his coming from heaven could stop the daring foot of
Ulysses, whom compassion for the misfortune of his friends had rendered
careless of danger: which when the god perceived, he had pity to see
valour so misplaced, and gave him the flower of the herb _moly_, which is
sovereign against enchantments. The moly is a small unsightly root, its
virtues but little known and in low estimation; the dull shepherd treads
on it every day with his clouted shoes; but it bears a small white flower,
which is medicinal against charms, blights, mildews, and damps. "Take this
in thy hand," said Mercury, "and with it boldly enter her gates; when she
shall strike thee with her rod, thinking to change thee, as she has
changed thy friends, boldly rush in upon her with thy sword, and extort
from her the dreadful oath of the gods, that she will use no enchantments
against thee; then force her to restore thy abused companions." He gave
Ulysses the little white flower, and, instructing him how to use it,
vanished.
When the god was departed, Ulysses with loud knockings beat at the gate of
the palace. The shining gates were opened, as before, and great Circe with
hospitable cheer invited in her guest. She placed him on a throne with
more distinction than she had used to his fellows; she mingled wine in a
costly bowl, and he drank of it, mixed with those poisonous drugs. When he
had drunk, she struck him with her charming-rod, and "To your sty!" she
cried; "out, swine! mingle with your companions!" But those powerful words
were not proof against the preservative which Mercury had given to
Ulysses; he remained unchanged, and, as the god had directed him, boldly
charged the witch with his sword, as if he meant to take her life; which
when she saw, and perceived that her charms were weak against the antidote
which Ulysses bore about him, she cried out and bent her knees beneath his
sword, embracing his, and said, "Who or what manner of man art thou? Never
drank any man before thee of this cup but he repented it in some brute's
form. Thy shape remains unaltered as thy mind. Thou canst be none other
than Ulysses, renowned above all the world for wisdom, whom the Fates have
long since decreed that I must love. This haughty bosom bends to thee. O
Ithacan, a goddess wooes thee to her bed."
[Illustration: '_Who or what manner of man art thou?_']
"O Circe," he replied, "how canst thou treat of love or marriage with one
whose friends thou hast turned into beasts? and now offerest him thy hand
in wedlock, only that thou mightest have him in thy power, to live the
life of a beast with thee, naked, effeminate, subject to thy will, perhaps
to be advanced in time to the honour of a place in thy sty. What pleasure
canst thou promise which may tempt the soul of a reasonable man? Thy
meats, spiced with poison; or thy wines, drugged with death? Thou must
swear to me that thou wilt never attempt against me the treasons which
thou hast practised upon my friends." The enchantress, won by the terror
of his threats, or by the violence of that new love which she felt
kindling in her veins for him, swore by Styx, the great oath of the gods,
that she meditated no injury to him. Then Ulysses made show of gentler
treatment, which gave her hopes of inspiring him with a passion equal to
that which she felt. She called her handmaids, four that served her in
chief, who were daughters to her silver fountains, to her sacred rivers,
and to her consecrated woods, to deck her apartments, to spread rich
carpets, and set out her silver tables with dishes of the purest gold, and
meat as precious as that which the gods eat, to entertain her guest. One
brought water to wash his feet, and one brought wine to chase away, with a
refreshing sweetness, the sorrows that had come of late so thick upon him,
and hurt his noble mind. They strewed perfumes on his head, and, after he
had bathed in a bath of the choicest aromatics, they brought him rich and
costly apparel to put on. Then he was conducted to a throne of massy
silver, and a regale, fit for Jove when he banquets, was placed before
him. But the feast which Ulysses desired was to see his friends (the
partners of his voyage) once more in the shapes of men; and the food which
could give him nourishment must be taken in at his eyes. Because he missed
this sight, he sat melancholy and thoughtful, and would taste of none of
the rich delicacies placed before him. Which when Circe noted, she easily
divined the cause of his sadness, and leaving the seat in which she sat
throned, went to her sty, and let abroad his men, who came in like swine,
and filled the ample hall, where Ulysses sat, with gruntings. Hardly had
he time to let his sad eye run over their altered forms and brutal
metamorphosis, when, with an ointment which she smeared over them,
suddenly their bristles fell off, and they started up in their own shapes,
men as before. They knew their leader again, and clung about him, with joy
of their late restoration, and some shame for their late change; and wept
so loud, blubbering out their joy in broken accents, that the palace was
filled with a sound of pleasing mourning, and the witch herself, great
Circe, was not unmoved at the sight. To make her atonement complete, she
sent for the remnant of Ulysses's men who stayed behind at the ship,
giving up their great commander for lost; who when they came, and saw him
again alive, circled with their fellows, no expression can tell what joy
they felt; they even cried out with rapture, and to have seen their
frantic expressions of mirth a man might have supposed that they were just
in sight of their country earth, the cliffs of rocky Ithaca. Only
Eurylochus would hardly be persuaded to enter that palace of wonders, for
he remembered with a kind of horror how his companions had vanished from
his sight.
Then great Circe spake, and gave order that there should be no more
sadness among them, nor remembering of past sufferings. For as yet they
fared like men that are exiles from their country, and if a gleam of mirth
shot among them, it was suddenly quenched with the thought of their
helpless and homeless condition. Her kind persuasions wrought upon Ulysses
and the rest, and they spent twelve months in all manner of delight with
her in her palace. For Circe was a powerful magician, and could command
the moon from her sphere, or unroot the solid oak from its place to make
it dance for their diversion, and by the help of her illusions she could
vary the taste of pleasures, and contrive delights, recreations, and jolly
pastimes, to "fetch the day about from sun to sun, and rock the tedious
year as in a delightful dream."
At length Ulysses awoke from the trance of the faculties into which her
charms had thrown him, and the thought of home returned with tenfold
vigour to goad and sting him; that home where he had left his virtuous
wife Penelope, and his young son Telemachus. One day when Circe had been
lavish of her caresses, and was in her kindest humour, he moved her
subtly, and as it were afar off, the question of his home-return; to which
she answered firmly, "O Ulysses, it is not in my power to detain one whom
the gods have destined to further trials. But leaving me, before you
pursue your journey home, you must visit the house of Ades, or Death, to
consult the shade of Tiresias the Theban prophet; to whom alone, of all
the dead, Proserpine, queen of hell, has committed the secret of future
events: it is he that must inform you whether you shall ever see again
your wife and country." "O Circe," he cried, "that is impossible: who
shall steer my course to Pluto's kingdom? Never ship had strength to make
that voyage." "Seek no guide," she replied; "but raise you your mast, and
hoist your white sails, and sit in your ship in peace: the north wind
shall waft you through the seas, till you shall cross the expanse of the
ocean and come to where grow the poplar groves and willows pale of
Proserpine: where Pyriphlegethon and Cocytus and Acheron mingle their
waves. Cocytus is an arm of Styx, the forgetful river. Here dig a pit, and
make it a cubit broad and a cubit long, and pour in milk, and honey, and
wine, and the blood of a ram, and the blood of a black ewe, and turn away
thy face while thou pourest in, and the dead shall come flocking to taste
the milk and the blood; but suffer none to approach thy offering till thou
hast inquired of Tiresias all which thou wishest to know."
He did as great Circe had appointed. He raised his mast, and hoisted his
white sails, and sat in his ship in peace. The north wind wafted him
through the seas, till he crossed the ocean, and came to the sacred woods
of Proserpine. He stood at the confluence of the three floods, and digged
a pit, as she had given directions, and poured in his offering--the blood
of a ram, and the blood of a black ewe, milk, and honey, and wine; and the
dead came to his banquet; aged men, and women, and youths, and children
who died in infancy. But none of them would he suffer to approach, and dip
their thin lips in the offering, till Tiresias was served, not though his
own mother was among the number, whom now for the first time he knew to be
dead, for he had left her living when he went to Troy, and she had died
since his departure, and the tidings never reached him; though it irked
his soul to use constraint upon her, yet in compliance with the injunction
of great Circe he forced her to retire along with the other ghosts. Then
Tiresias, who bore a golden sceptre, came and lapped of the offering, and
immediately he knew Ulysses, and began to prophesy: _he denounced woe to
Ulysses--woe, woe, and many sufferings--through the anger of Neptune for
the putting out of the eye of the sea-god's son. Yet there was safety
after suffering, if they could abstain from slaughtering the oxen of the
Sun after they landed in the Triangular island. For Ulysses, the gods had
destined him from a king to become a beggar, and to perish by his own
guests, unless he slew those who knew him not_.
[Illustration: _And the dead came to his banquet_.]
This prophecy, ambiguously delivered, was all that Tiresias was empowered
to unfold, or else there was no longer place for him; for now the souls of
the other dead came flocking in such numbers, tumultuously demanding the
blood, that freezing horror seized the limbs of the living Ulysses, to see
so many, and all dead, and he the only one alive in that region. Now his
mother came and lapped the blood, without restraint from her son, and now
she knew him to be her son, and inquired of him why he had come alive to
their comfortless habitations. And she said that affliction for Ulysses's
long absence had preyed upon her spirits, and brought her to the grave.
Ulysses's soul melted at her moving narration, and forgetting the state of
the dead, and that the airy texture of disembodied spirits does not admit
of the embraces of flesh and blood, he threw his arms about her to clasp
her: the poor ghost melted from his embrace, and, looking mournfully upon
him, vanished away.
Then saw he other females: Tyro, who when she lived was the paramour of
Neptune, and by him had Pelias and Neleus. Antiope, who bore two like sons
to Jove, Amphion and Zethus, founders of Thebes. Alcmena, the mother of
Hercules, with her fair daughter, afterwards her daughter-in-law, Megara.
There also Ulysses saw Jocasta, the unfortunate mother and wife of
Oedipus; who, ignorant of kin, wedded with her son, and when she had
discovered the unnatural alliance, for shame and grief hanged herself. He
continued to drag a wretched life above the earth, haunted by the dreadful
Furies. There was Leda, the wife of Tyndarus, the mother of the beautiful
Helen, and of the two brave brothers Castor and Pollux, who obtained this
grace from Jove, that, being dead, they should enjoy life alternately,
living in pleasant places under the earth. For Pollux had prayed that his
brother Castor, who was subject to death, as the son of Tyndarus, should
partake of his own immortality, which he derived from an immortal sire.
This the Fates denied; therefore Pollux was permitted to divide his
immortality with his brother Castor, dying and living alternately.
There was Iphimedia, who bore two sons to Neptune that were giants, Otus
and Ephialtes: Earth in her prodigality never nourished bodies to such
portentous size and beauty as these two children were of, except Orion. At
nine years old they had imaginations of climbing to heaven to see what the
gods were doing; they thought to make stairs of mountains, and were for
piling Ossa upon Olympus, and setting Pelion upon that, and had perhaps
performed it, if they had lived till they were striplings; but they were
cut off by death in the infancy of their ambitious project. Phaedra was
there, and Procris, and Ariadne, mournful for Theseus's desertion, and
Maera, and Clymene, and Eryphile, who preferred gold before wedlock faith.
But now came a mournful ghost, that late was Agamemnon, son of Atreus, the
mighty leader of all the host of Greece and their confederate kings that
warred against Troy. He came with the rest to sip a little of the blood at
that uncomfortable banquet. Ulysses was moved with compassion to see him
among them, and asked him what untimely fate had brought him there, if
storms had overwhelmed him coming from Troy, or if he had perished in some
mutiny by his own soldiers at a division of the prey.
"By none of these," he replied, "did I come to my death; but slain at a
banquet to which I was invited by Aegisthus after my return home. He
conspiring with my adulterous wife, they laid a scheme for my destruction,
training me forth to a banquet as an ox goes to the slaughter, and, there
surrounding me, they slew me with all my friends about me.
"Clytemnestra, my wicked wife, forgetting the vows which she swore to me
in wedlock, would not lend a hand to close my eyes in death. But nothing
is so heaped with impieties as such a woman, who would kill her spouse
that married her a maid. When I brought her home to my house a bride, I
hoped in my heart that she would be loving to me and to my children. Now,
her black treacheries have cast a foul aspersion on her whole sex. Blessed
husbands will have their loving wives in suspicion for her bad deeds."
"Alas!" said Ulysses, "there seems to be a fatality in your royal house of
Atreus, and that they are hated of Jove for their wives. For Helen's sake,
your brother Menelaus's wife, what multitudes fell in the wars of Troy!"
Agamemnon replied, "For this cause be not thou more kind than wise to any
woman. Let not thy words express to her at any time all that is in thy
mind, keep still some secrets to thyself. But thou by any bloody
contrivances of thy wife never needst fear to fall. Exceeding wise she is,
and to her wisdom she has a goodness as eminent; Icarius's daughter,
Penelope the chaste: we left her a young bride when we parted from our
wives to go to the wars, her first child sucking at her breast, the young
Telemachus, whom you shall see grown up to manhood on your return, and he
shall greet his father with befitting welcomes. My Orestes, my dear son, I
shall never see again. His mother has deprived his father of the sight of
him, and perhaps will slay him as she slew his sire. It is now no world to
trust a woman in. But what says fame? is my son yet alive? lives he in
Orchomen, or in Pylus, or is he resident in Sparta, in his uncle's court?
As yet, I see, divine Orestes is not here with me."
To this Ulysses replied that he had received no certain tidings where
Orestes abode, only some uncertain rumours which he could not report for
truth.
While they held this sad conference, with kind tears striving to render
unkind fortunes more palatable, the soul of great Achilles joined them.
"What desperate adventure has brought Ulysses to these regions," said
Achilles; "to see the end of dead men, and their foolish shades?"
Ulysses answered him that he had come to consult Tiresias respecting his
voyage home. "But thou, O son of Thetis," said he, "why dost thou
disparage the state of the dead? Seeing that as alive thou didst surpass
all men in glory, thou must needs retain thy pre-eminence here below: so
great Achilles triumphs over death."
But Achilles made reply that he had much rather be a peasant slave upon
the earth than reign over all the dead. So much did the inactivity and
slothful condition of that state displease his unquenchable and restless
spirit. Only he inquired of Ulysses if his father Peleus were living, and
how his son Neoptolemus conducted himself.
Of Peleus Ulysses could tell him nothing; but of Neoptolemus he thus bore
witness: "From Scyros I convoyed your son by sea to the Greeks: where I
can speak of him, for I knew him. He was chief in council, and in the
field. When any question was proposed, so quick was his conceit in the
forward apprehension of any case, that he ever spoke first, and was heard
with more attention than the older heads. Only myself and aged Nestor
could compare with him in giving advice. In battle I cannot speak his
praise, unless I could count all that fell by his sword. I will only
mention one instance of his manhood. When we sat hid in the belly of the
wooden horse, in the ambush which deceived the Trojans to their
destruction, I, who had the management of that stratagem, still shifted my
place from side to side to note the behaviour of our men. In some I marked
their hearts trembling, through all the pains which they took to appear
valiant, and in others tears, that in spite of manly courage would gush
forth. And to say truth, it was an adventure of high enterprise, and as
perilous a stake as was ever played in war's game. But in him I could not
observe the least sign of weakness, no tears nor tremblings, but his hand
still on his good sword, and ever urging me to set open the machine and
let us out before the time was come for doing it; and when we sallied out
he was still first in that fierce destruction and bloody midnight
desolation of king Priam's city."
This made the soul of Achilles to tread a swifter pace, with high-raised
feet, as he vanished away, for the joy which he took in his son being
applauded by Ulysses.
A sad shade stalked by, which Ulysses knew to be the ghost of Ajax, his
opponent, when living, in that famous dispute about the right of
succeeding to the arms of the deceased Achilles. They being adjudged by
the Greeks to Ulysses, as the prize of wisdom above bodily strength, the
noble Ajax in despite went mad, and slew himself. The sight of his rival
turned to a shade by his dispute so subdued the passion of emulation in
Ulysses that for his sake he wished that judgment in that controversy had
been given against himself, rather than so illustrious a chief should have
perished for the desire of those arms which his prowess (second only to
Achilles in fight) so eminently had deserved. "Ajax," he cried, "all the
Greeks mourn for thee as much as they lamented for Achilles. Let not thy
wrath burn forever, great son of Telamon. Ulysses seeks peace with thee,
and will make any atonement to thee that can appease thy hurt spirit." But
the shade stalked on, and would not exchange a word with Ulysses, though
he prayed it with many tears and many earnest entreaties. "He might have
spoke to me," said Ulysses, "since I spoke to him; but I see the
resentments of the dead are eternal."
Then Ulysses saw a throne on which was placed a judge distributing
sentence. He that sat on the throne was Minos, and he was dealing out just
judgments to the dead. He it is that assigns them their place in bliss or
woe.
Then came by a thundering ghost, the large-limbed Orion, the mighty
hunter, who was hunting there the ghosts of the beasts which he had
slaughtered in desert hills upon the earth. For the dead delight in the
occupations which pleased them in the time of their living upon the earth.
There was Tityus suffering eternal pains because he had sought to violate
the honour of Latona, as she passed from Pytho into Panopeus. Two vultures
sat perpetually preying upon his liver with their crooked beaks; which as
fast as they devoured, is forever renewed; nor can he fray them away with
his great hands.
There was Tantalus, plagued for his great sins, standing up to his chin in
water, which he can never taste, but still as he bows his head, thinking
to quench his burning thirst, instead of water he licks up unsavory dust.
All fruits pleasant to the sight, and of delicious flavor, hang in ripe
clusters about his head, seeming as though they offered themselves to be
plucked by him; but when he reaches out his hand, some wind carries them
far out of his sight into the clouds; so he is starved in the midst of
plenty by the righteous doom of Jove, in memory of that inhuman banquet at
which the sun turned pale, when the unnatural father served up the limbs
of his little son in a dish, as meat for his divine guests.
There was Sisyphus, that sees no end to his labours. His punishment is, to
be forever rolling up a vast stone to the top of a mountain, which, when
it gets to the top, falls down with a crushing weight, and all his work is
to be begun again. He was bathed all over in sweat, that reeked out a
smoke which covered his head like a mist. His crime had been the revealing
of state secrets.
There Ulysses saw Hercules--not that Hercules who enjoys immortal life in
heaven among the gods, and is married to Hebe or Youth; but his shadow,
which remains below. About him the dead flocked as thick as bats, hovering
around, and cuffing at his head: he stands with his dreadful bow, ever in
the act to shoot.
There also might Ulysses have seen and spoken with the shades of Theseus,
and Pirithous, and the old heroes; but he had conversed enough with
horrors; therefore, covering his face with his hands, that he might see no
more spectres, he resumed his seat in his ship, and pushed off. The bark
moved of itself without the help of any oar, and soon brought him out of
the regions of death into the cheerful quarters of the living, and to the
island of Aeaea, whence he had set forth.
</chapter>
<chapter title="CHAPTER THREE">
The Song of the Sirens.--Scylla and Charybdis.--The Oxen of the Sun.--The
Judgment.--The Crew Killed by Lightning.
"Unhappy man, who at thy birth wast appointed twice to die! others shall
die once; but thou, besides that death that remains for thee, common to
all men, hast in thy lifetime visited the shades of death. Thee Scylla,
thee Charybdis, expect. Thee the deathful Sirens lie in wait for, that
taint the minds of whoever listen to them with their sweet singing.
Whosoever shall but hear the call of any Siren, he will so despise both
wife and children through their sorceries that the stream of his affection
never again shall set homewards, nor shall he take joy in wife or children
thereafter, or they in him."
With these prophetic greetings great Circe met Ulysses on his return. He
besought her to instruct him in the nature of the Sirens, and by what
method their baneful allurements were to be resisted.
"They are sisters three," she replied, "that sit in a mead (by which your
ship must needs pass) circled with dead men's bones. These are the bones
of men whom they have slain, after with fawning invitements they have
enticed them into their fen. Yet such is the celestial harmony of their
voice accompanying the persuasive magic of their words, that, knowing
this, you shall not be able to withstand their enticements. Therefore,
when you are to sail by them, you shall stop the ears of your companions
with wax, that they may hear no note of that dangerous music; but for
yourself, that you may hear, and yet live, give them strict command to
bind you hand and foot to the mast, and in no case to set you free, till
you are out of the danger of the temptation, though you should entreat it,
and implore it ever so much, but to bind you rather the more for your
requesting to be loosed. So shall you escape that snare."
Ulysses then prayed her that she would inform him what Scylla and
Charybdis were, which she had taught him by name to fear. She replied:
"Sailing from Aeaea to Trinacria, you must pass at an equal distance
between two fatal rocks. Incline never so little either to the one side or
the other, and your ship must meet with certain destruction. No vessel
ever yet tried that pass without being lost but the Argo, which owed her
safety to the sacred freight she bore, the fleece of the golden-backed
ram, which could not perish. The biggest of these rocks which you shall
come to, Scylla hath in charge. There in a deep whirlpool at the foot of
the rock the abhorred monster shrouds her face; who if she were to show
her full form, no eye of man or god could endure the sight: thence she
stretches out all her six long necks, peering and diving to suck up fish,
dolphins, dog-fish, and whales, whole ships, and their men, whatever comes
within her raging gulf. The other rock is lesser, and of less ominous
aspect; but there dreadful Charybdis sits, supping the black deeps. Thrice
a day she drinks her pits dry, and thrice a day again she belches them all
up; but when she is drinking, come not nigh, for, being once caught, the
force of Neptune cannot redeem you from her swallow. Better trust to
Scylla, for she will but have for her six necks six men: Charybdis in her
insatiate draught will ask all."
Then Ulysses inquired, in case he should escape Charybdis, whether he
might not assail that other monster with his sword; to which she replied
that he must not think that he had an enemy subject to death, or wounds,
to contend with, for Scylla could never die. Therefore, his best safety
was in flight, and to invoke none of the gods but Gratis, who is Scylla's
mother, and might perhaps forbid her daughter to devour them. For his
conduct after he arrived at Trinacria she referred him to the admonitions
which had been given him by Tiresias.
Ulysses having communicated her instructions, as far as related to the
Sirens, to his companions, who had not been present at that interview--but
concealing from them the rest, as he had done the terrible predictions of
Tiresias, that they might not be deterred by fear from pursuing their
voyage--the time for departure being come, they set their sails, and took
a final leave of great Circe; who by her art calmed the heavens, and gave
them smooth seas, and a right forewind (the seaman's friend) to bear them
on their way to Ithaca.
They had not sailed past a hundred leagues before the breeze which Circe
had lent them suddenly stopped. It was stricken dead. All the sea lay in
prostrate slumber. Not a gasp of air could be felt. The ship stood still.
Ulysses guessed that the island of the Sirens was not far off, and that
they had charmed the air so with their devilish singing. Therefore he made
him cakes of wax, as Circe had instructed him, and stopped the ears of his
men with them; then causing himself to be bound hand and foot, he
commanded the rowers to ply their oars and row as fast as speed could
carry them past that fatal shore. They soon came within sight of the
Sirens, who sang in Ulysses's hearing:
  Come here, thou, worthy of a world of praise,
  That dost so high the Grecian glory raise,
  Ulysses' stay thy ship, and that song hear
  That none pass'd ever, but it bent his ear,
  But left him ravish'd, and instructed more
  By us than any ever heard before.
  For we know all things, whatsoever were
  In wide Troy labor'd, whatsoever there
  The Grecians and the Trojans both sustain'd,
  By those high issues that the gods ordain'd;
  And whatsoever all the earth can show
  To inform a knowledge of desert, we know.
These were the words, but the celestial harmony of the voices which sang
them no tongue can describe: it took the ear of Ulysses with ravishment.
He would have broken his bonds to rush after them; and threatened, wept,
sued, entreated, commanded, crying out with tears and passionate
imprecations, conjuring his men by all the ties of perils past which they
had endured in common, by fellowship and love, and the authority which he
retained among them, to let him loose; but at no rate would they obey him.
And still the Sirens sang. Ulysses made signs, motions, gestures,
promising mountains of gold if they would set him free; but their oars
only moved faster. And still the Sirens sang. And still the more he
adjured them to set him free, the faster with cords and ropes they bound
him; till they were quite out of hearing of the Sirens' notes, whose
effect great Circe had so truly predicted. And well she might speak of
them, for often she has joined her own enchanting voice to theirs, while
she has sat in the flowery meads, mingled with the Sirens and the Water
Nymphs, gathering their potent herbs and drugs of magic quality: their
singing altogether has made the gods stoop, and "heaven drowsy with the
harmony."
[Illustration: _He would have broken his bonds to rush after them_.]
Escaped that peril, they had not sailed yet a hundred leagues farther,
when they heard a roar afar off, which Ulysses knew to be the barking of
Scylla's dogs, which surround her waist, and bark incessantly. Coming
nearer they beheld a smoke ascend, with a horrid murmur, which arose from
that other whirlpool, to which they made nigher approaches than to Scylla.
Through the furious eddy, which is in that place, the ship stood still as
a stone, for there was no man to lend his hand to an oar, the dismal roar
of Scylla's dogs at a distance, and the nearer clamours of Charybdis,
where everything made an echo, quite taking from them the power of
exertion. Ulysses went up and down encouraging his men, one by one, giving
them good words, telling them that they were in greater perils when they
were blocked up in the Cyclop's cave, yet, Heaven assisting his counsels,
he had delivered them out of that extremity. That he could not believe but
they remembered it; and wished them to give the same trust to the same
care which he had now for their welfare. That they must exert all the
strength and wit which they had, and try if Jove would not grant them an
escape even out of this peril. In particular, he cheered up the pilot who
sat at the helm, and told him that he must show more firmness than other
men, as he had more trust committed to him, and had the sole management by
his skill of the vessel in which all their safeties were embarked. That a
rock lay hid within those boiling whirlpools which he saw, on the outside
of which he must steer, if he would avoid his own destruction and the
destruction of them all.
They heard him, and like men took to the oars; but little knew what
opposite danger, in shunning that rock, they must be thrown upon. For
Ulysses had concealed from them the wounds, never to be healed, which
Scylla was to open: their terror would else have robbed them all of all
care to steer or move an oar, and have made them hide under the hatches,
for fear of seeing her, where he and they must have died an idle death.
But even then he forgot the precautions which Circe had given him to
prevent harm to his person, who had willed him not to arm, or show himself
once to Scylla; but disdaining not to venture life for his brave
companions, he could not contain, but armed in all points, and taking a
lance in either hand, he went up to the fore-deck, and looked when Scylla
would appear.
She did not show herself as yet, and still the vessel steered closer by
her rock, as it sought to shun that other more dreaded; for they saw how
horribly Charybdis' black throat drew into her all the whirling deep,
which she disgorged again, that all about her boiled like a kettle, and
the rock roared with troubled waters; which when she supped in again, all
the bottom turned up, and disclosed far under shore the swart sands naked,
whose whole stern sight frayed the startled blood from their faces, and
made Ulysses turn to view the wonder of whirlpools. Which when Scylla saw,
from out her black den she darted out her six long necks, and swooped up
as many of his friends: whose cries Ulysses heard, and saw them too late,
with their heels turned up, and their hands thrown to him for succour, who
had been their help in all extremities, but could not deliver them now;
and he heard them shriek out, as she tore them, and to the last they
continued to throw their hands out to him for sweet life. In all his
sufferings he never had beheld a sight so full of miseries.
Escaped from Scylla and Charybdis, but with a diminished crew, Ulysses and
the sad remains of his followers reached the Trinacrian shore. Here
landing, he beheld oxen grazing of such surpassing size and beauty that,
both from them and from the shape of the Island (having three promontories
jutting into the sea), he judged rightly that he was come to the
Triangular island and the oxen of the Sun, of which Tiresias had
forewarned him.
So great was his terror lest through his own fault, or that of his men,
any violence or profanation should be offered to the holy oxen, that even
then, tired as they were with the perils and fatigues of the day past, and
unable to stir an oar, or use any exertion, and though night was fast
coming on, he would have had them re-embark immediately, and make the best
of their way from that dangerous station; but his men with one voice
resolutely opposed it, and even the too cautious Eurylochus himself
withstood the proposal; so much did the temptation of a little ease and
refreshment (ease tenfold sweet after such labours) prevail over the
sagest counsels, and the apprehension of certain evil outweigh the
prospect of contingent danger. They expostulated that the nerves of
Ulysses seemed to be made of steel, and his limbs not liable to lassitude
like other men's; that waking or sleeping seemed indifferent to him; but
that they were men, not gods, and felt the common appetites for food and
sleep. That in the night-time all the winds most destructive to ships are
generated. That black night still required to be served with meat, and
sleep, and quiet havens, and ease. That the best sacrifice to the sea was
in the morning. With such sailor-like sayings and mutinous arguments,
which the majority have always ready to justify disobedience to their
betters, they forced Ulysses to comply with their requisition, and against
his will to take up his night-quarters on shore. But he first exacted from
them an oath that they would neither maim nor kill any of the cattle which
they saw grazing, but content themselves with such food as Circe had
stowed their vessel with when they parted from Aeaea. This they man by man
severally promised, imprecating the heaviest curses on whoever should
break it; and mooring their bark within a creek, they went to supper,
contenting themselves that night with such food as Circe had given them,
not without many sad thoughts of their friends whom Scylla had devoured,
the grief of which kept them great part of the night waking.
In the morning Ulysses urged them again to a religious observance of the
oath that they had sworn, not in any case to attempt the blood of those
fair herds which they saw grazing, but to content themselves with the
ship's food; for the god who owned those cattle sees and hears all.
They faithfully obeyed, and remained in that good mind for a month, during
which they were confined to that station by contrary winds, till all the
wine and the bread were gone which they had brought with them. When their
victuals were gone, necessity compelled them to stray in quest of whatever
fish or fowl they could snare, which that coast did not yield in any great
abundance. Then Ulysses prayed to all the gods that dwelt in bountiful
heaven, that they would be pleased to yield them some means to stay their
hunger without having recourse to profane and forbidden violations; but
the ears of heaven seemed to be shut, or some god incensed plotted his
ruin; for at midday, when he should chiefly have been vigilant and
watchful to prevent mischief, a deep sleep fell upon the eyes of Ulysses,
during which he lay totally insensible of all that passed in the world,
and what his friends or what his enemies might do for his welfare or
destruction. Then Eurylochus took his advantage. He was the man of most
authority with them after Ulysses. He represented to them all the misery
of their condition; how that every death is hateful and grievous to
mortality, but that of all deaths famine is attended with the most
painful, loathsome, and humiliating circumstances; that the subsistence
which they could hope to draw from fowling or fishing was too precarious
to be depended upon; that there did not seem to be any chance of the winds
changing to favour their escape, but that they must inevitably stay there
and perish, if they let an irrational superstition deter them from the
means which nature offered to their hands; that Ulysses might be deceived
in his belief that these oxen had any sacred qualities above other oxen;
and even admitting that they were the property of the god of the Sun, as
he said they were, the Sun did neither eat nor drink, and the gods were
best served not by a scrupulous conscience, but by a thankful heart, which
took freely what they as freely offered: with these and such like
persuasions he prevailed on his half-famished and half-mutinous companions
to begin the impious violation of their oath by the slaughter of seven of
the fairest of these oxen which were grazing. Part they roasted and eat,
and part they offered in sacrifice to the gods, particularly to Apollo,
god of the Sun, vowing to build a temple to his godhead when they should
arrive in Ithaca, and deck it with magnificent and numerous gifts. Vain
men! and superstition worse than that which they so lately derided! to
imagine that prospective penitence can excuse a present violation of duty,
and that the pure natures of the heavenly powers will admit of compromise
or dispensation for sin.
But to their feast they fell, dividing the roasted portions of the flesh,
savoury and pleasant meat to them, but a sad sight to the eyes, and a
savour of death in the nostrils, of the waking Ulysses, who just woke in
time to witness, but not soon enough to prevent, their rash and
sacrilegious banquet. He had scarce time to ask what great mischief was
this which they had done unto him; when behold, a prodigy! the ox-hides
which they had stripped began to creep as if they had life; and the
roasted flesh bellowed as the ox used to do when he was living. The hair
of Ulysses stood up on end with affright at these omens; but his
companions, like men whom the gods had infatuated to their destruction,
persisted in their horrible banquet.
The Sun from his burning chariot saw how Ulysses's men had slain his oxen,
and he cried to his father Jove, "Revenge me upon these impious men who
have slain my oxen, which it did me good to look upon when I walked my
heavenly round. In all my daily course I never saw such bright and
beautiful creatures as those my oxen were." The father promised that ample
retribution should be taken of those accursed men: which was fulfilled
shortly after, when they took their leaves of the fatal island.
Six days they feasted in spite of the signs of heaven, and on the seventh,
the wind changing, they set their sails and left the island; and their
hearts were cheerful with the banquets they had held; all but the heart of
Ulysses, which sank within him, as with wet eyes he beheld his friends,
and gave them for lost, as men devoted to divine vengeance. Which soon
overtook them; for they had not gone many leagues before a dreadful
tempest arose, which burst their cables; down came their mast, crushing
the skull of the pilot in its fall; off he fell from the stern into the
water, and the bark wanting his management drove along at the wind's
mercy; thunders roared, and terrible lightnings of Jove came down; first a
bolt struck Eurylochus, then another, and then another, till all the crew
were killed, and their bodies swam about like sea-mews; and the ship was
split in pieces. Only Ulysses survived; and he had no hope of safety but
in tying himself to the mast, where he sat riding upon the waves, like one
that in no extremity would yield to fortune. Nine days was he floating
about with all the motions of the sea, with no other support than the
slender mast under him, till the tenth night cast him, all spent and weary
with toil, upon the friendly shores of the island Ogygia.
[Illustration: _Nine days was he floating about with all the motions of
the sea_.]
</chapter>
<chapter title="CHAPTER FOUR">
The Island of Calypso.--Immortality Refused.
Henceforth the adventures of the single Ulysses must be pursued. Of all
those faithful partakers of his toil, who with him left Asia, laden with
the spoils of Troy, now not one remains, but all a prey to the remorseless
waves, and food for some great fish; their gallant navy reduced to one
ship, and that finally swallowed up and lost. Where now are all their
anxious thoughts of home? that perseverance with which they went through
the severest sufferings and the hardest labours to which poor seafarers
were ever exposed, that their toils at last might be crowned with the
sight of their native shores and wives at Ithaca! Ulysses is now in the
isle Ogygia, called the Delightful Island. The poor shipwrecked chief, the
slave of all the elements, is once again raised by the caprice of fortune
into a shadow of prosperity. He that was cast naked upon the shore, bereft
of all his companions, has now a goddess to attend upon him, and his
companions are the nymphs which never die. Who has not heard of Calypso?
her grove crowned with alders and poplars; her grotto, against which the
luxuriant vine laid forth his purple grapes; her ever new delights,
crystal fountains, running brooks, meadows flowering with sweet
balm--gentle and with violet; blue violets which like veins enamelled the
smooth breasts of each fragrant mead! It were useless to describe over
again what has been so well told already; or to relate those soft arts
of courtship which the goddess used to detain Ulysses; the same in kind
which she afterwards practised upon his less wary son, whom Minerva, in
the shape of Mentor, hardly preserved from her snares, when they came to
the Delightful Island together in search of the scarce departed Ulysses.
A memorable example of married love, and a worthy instance how dear to
every good man his country is, was exhibited by Ulysses. If Circe loved
him sincerely, Calypso loves him with tenfold more warmth and passion: she
can deny him nothing, but his departure; she offers him everything, even
to a participation of her immortality--if he will stay and share in her
pleasures, he shall never die. But death with glory has greater charms for
a mind heroic than a life that shall never die with shame; and when he
pledged his vows to his Penelope, he reserved no stipulation that he would
forsake her whenever a goddess should think him worthy of her bed, but
they had sworn to live and grow old together; and he would not survive her
if he could, no meanly share in immortality itself, from which she was
excluded.
These thoughts kept him pensive and melancholy in the midst of pleasure.
His heart was on the seas, making voyages to Ithaca. Twelve months had
worn away, when Minerva from heaven saw her favourite, how he sat still
pining on the seashores (his daily custom), wishing for a ship to carry
him home. She (who is wisdom herself) was indignant that so wise and brave
a man as Ulysses should be held in effeminate bondage by an unworthy
goddess; and at her request her father Jove ordered Mercury to go down to
the earth to command Calypso to dismiss her guest. The divine messenger
tied fast to his feet his winged shoes, which bear him over land and seas,
and took in his hand his golden rod, the ensign of his authority. Then
wheeling in many an airy round, he stayed not till he alighted on the firm
top of the mountain Pieria; thence he fetched a second circuit over the
seas, kissing the waves in his flight with his feet, as light as any
sea-mew fishing dips her wings, till he touched the isle Ogygia, and
soared up from the blue sea to the grotto of the goddess to whom his
errand was ordained.
His message struck a horror, checked by love, through all the faculties of
Calypso. She replied to it, incensed: "You gods are insatiate, past all
that live, in all things which you affect; which makes you so envious and
grudging. It afflicts you to the heart when any goddess seeks the love of
a mortal man in marriage, though you yourselves without scruple link
yourselves to women of the earth. So it fared with you, when the
delicious-fingered Morning shared Orion's bed; you could never satisfy
your hate and your jealousy till you had incensed the chastity-loving
dame, Diana, who leads the precise life, to come upon him by stealth in
Ortygia, and pierce him through with her arrows. And when rich-haired
Ceres gave the reins to her affections, and took Iasion (well worthy) to
her arms, the secret was not so cunningly kept but Jove had soon notice of
it, and the poor mortal paid for his felicity with death, struck through
with lightnings. And now you envy me the possession of a wretched man whom
tempests have cast upon my shores, making him lawfully mine; whose ship
Jove rent in pieces with his hot thunderbolts, killing all his friends.
Him I have preserved, loved, nourished; made him mine by protection, my
creature; by every tie of gratitude, mine; have vowed to make him
deathless like myself; him you will take from me. But I know your power,
and that it is vain for me to resist. Tell your king that I obey his
mandates."
With an ill grace Calypso promised to fulfil the commands of Jove; and,
Mercury departing, she went to find Ulysses, where he sat outside the
grotto, not knowing of the heavenly message, drowned in discontent, not
seeing any human probability of his ever returning home.
She said to him: "Unhappy man, no longer afflict yourself with pining
after your country, but build you a ship, with which you may return home,
since it is the will of the gods; who, doubtless, as they are greater in
power than I, are greater in skill, and best can tell what is fittest for
man. But I call the gods and my inward conscience to witness that I have
no thought but what stood with thy safety, nor would have done or
counselled anything against thy good. I persuaded thee to nothing which
I should not have followed myself in thy extremity; for my mind is
innocent and simple. O, if thou knewest what dreadful sufferings thou must
yet endure before ever thou reachest thy native land, thou wouldest not
esteem so hardly of a goddess's offer to share her immortality with thee;
nor, for a few years' enjoyment of a perishing Penelope, refuse an
imperishable and never-dying life with Calypso."
He replied: "Ever-honoured, great Calypso, let it not displease thee, that
I a mortal man desire to see and converse again with a wife that is
mortal: human objects are best fitted to human infirmities. I well know
how far in wisdom, in feature, in stature, proportion, beauty, in all the
gifts of the mind, thou exceedest my Penelope: she is a mortal, and
subject to decay; thou immortal, ever growing, yet never old; yet in her
sight all my desires terminate, all my wishes--in the sight of her, and of
my country earth. If any god, envious of my return, shall lay his dreadful
hand upon me as I pass the seas, I submit; for the same powers have given
me a mind not to sink under oppression. In wars and waves my sufferings
have not been small."
She heard his pleaded reasons, and of force she must assent; so to her
nymphs she gave in charge from her sacred woods to cut down timber, to
make Ulysses a ship. They obeyed, though in a work unsuitable to their
soft fingers, yet to obedience no sacrifice is hard; and Ulysses busily
bestirred himself, labouring far more hard than they, as was fitting, till
twenty tall trees, driest and fittest for timber, were felled. Then, like
a skilful shipwright, he fell to joining the planks, using the plane, the
axe, and the auger with such expedition that in four days' time a ship was
made, complete with all her decks, hatches, sideboards, yards. Calypso
added linen for the sails, and tackling; and when she was finished, she
was a goodly vessel for a man to sail in, alone or in company, over the
wide seas. By the fifth morning she was launched; and Ulysses, furnished
with store of provisions, rich garments, and gold and silver, given him by
Calypso, took a last leave of her and of her nymphs, and of the isle
Ogygia which had so befriended him.
[Illustration: _Took a last leave of her and of her nymphs_.]
</chapter>
<chapter title="CHAPTER FIVE">
The Tempest.--The Sea-bird's Gift.--The Escape by Swimming.--The Sleep in
the Woods.
At the stern of his solitary ship Ulysses sat, and steered right artfully.
No sleep could seize his eyelids. He beheld the Pleiads, the Bear, which
is by some called the Wain, that moves round about Orion, and keeps still
above the ocean, and the slow-setting sign Bootes, which some name the
Wagoner. Seventeen days he held his course, and on the eighteenth the
coast of Phaeacia was in sight. The figure of the land, as seen from the
sea, was pretty and circular, and looked something like a shield.
Neptune, returning from visiting his favourite Aethiopians, from the
mountains of the Solymi, descried Ulysses ploughing the waves, his domain.
The sight of the man he so much hated for Polyphemus's sake, his son,
whose eye Ulysses had put out, set the god's heart on fire; and snatching
into his hand his horrid sea-sceptre, the trident of his power, he smote
the air and the sea, and conjured up all his black storms, calling down
night from the cope of heaven, and taking the earth into the sea, as it
seemed, with clouds, through the darkness and indistinctness which
prevailed; the billows rolling up before the fury of all the winds, that
contended together in their mighty sport.
Then the knees of Ulysses bent with fear, and then all his spirit was
spent, and he wished that he had been among the number of his countrymen
who fell before Troy, and had their funerals celebrated by all the Greeks,
rather than to perish thus, where no man could mourn him or know him.
As he thought these melancholy thoughts, a huge wave took him and washed
him overboard, ship and all upset amidst the billows, he struggling afar
off, clinging to her stern broken off which he yet held, her mast cracking
in two with the fury of that gust of mixed winds that struck it, sails and
sailyards fell into the deep, and he himself was long drowned under water,
nor could get his head above, wave so met with wave, as if they strove
which should depress him most; and the gorgeous garments given him by
Calypso clung about him, and hindered his swimming; yet neither for this,
nor for the overthrow of his ship, nor his own perilous condition, would
he give up his drenched vessel; but, wrestling with Neptune, got at length
hold of her again, and then sat in her hull, insulting over death, which
he had escaped, and the salt waves which he gave the seas again to give to
other men; his ship, striving to live, floated at random, cuffed from wave
to wave, hurled to and fro by all the winds: now Boreas tossed it to
Notus, Notus passed it to Eurus, and Eurus to the West Wind, who kept up
the horrid tennis.
Them in their mad sport Ino Leucothea beheld--Ino Leucothea, now a
sea-goddess, but once a mortal and the daughter of Cadmus; she with pity
beheld Ulysses the mark of their fierce contention, and rising from the
waves alighted on the ship, in shape like to the sea-bird which is called
a cormorant; and in her beak she held a wonderful girdle made of
sea-weeds, which grow at the bottom of the ocean, which she dropped at his
feet; and the bird spake to Ulysses, and counselled him not to trust any
more to that fatal vessel against which god Neptune had levelled his
furious wrath, nor to those ill-befriending garments which Calypso had
given him, but to quit both it and them, and trust for his safety to
swimming. "And here," said the seeming bird, "take this girdle and tie
about your middle, which has virtue to protect the wearer at sea, and you
shall safely reach the shore; but when you have landed, cast it far from
you back into the sea." He did as the sea-bird instructed him; he stripped
himself naked, and, fastening the wondrous girdle about his middle, cast
himself into the seas to swim. The bird dived past his sight into the
fathomless abyss of the ocean.
Two days and two nights he spent in struggling with the waves, though sore
buffeted, and almost spent, never giving up himself for lost, such
confidence he had in that charm which he wore about his middle, and in the
words of that divine bird. But the third morning the winds grew calm and
all the heavens were clear. Then he saw himself nigh land, which he knew
to be the coast of the Phaeacians, a people good to strangers and
abounding in ships, by whose favour he doubted not that he should soon
obtain a passage to his own country. And such joy he conceived in his
heart as good sons have that esteem their father's life dear, when long
sickness has held him down to his bed and wasted his body, and they see at
length health return to the old man, with restored strength and spirits,
in reward of their many prayers to the gods for his safety: so precious
was the prospect of home-return to Ulysses, that he might restore health
to his country (his better parent), that had long languished as full of
distempers in his absence. And then for his own safety's sake he had joy
to see the shores, the woods, so nigh and within his grasp as they seemed,
and he laboured with all the might of hands and feet to reach with
swimming that nigh-seeming land.
But when he approached near, a horrid sound of a huge sea beating against
rocks informed him that here was no place for landing, nor any harbour for
man's resort, but through the weeds and the foam which the sea belched up
against the land he could dimly discover the rugged shore all bristled
with flints, and all that part of the coast one impending rock that seemed
impossible to climb, and the water all about so deep that not a sand was
there for any tired foot to rest upon, and every moment he feared lest
some wave more cruel than the rest should crush him against a cliff,
rendering worse than vain all his landing; and should he swim to seek a
more commodious haven farther on, he was fearful lest, weak and spent as
he was, the winds would force him back a long way off into the main, where
the terrible god Neptune, for wrath that he had so nearly escaped his
power, having gotten him again into his domain, would send out some great
whale (of which those seas breed a horrid number) to swallow him up alive;
with such malignity he still pursued him.
While these thoughts distracted him with diversity of dangers, one bigger
wave drove against a sharp rock his naked body, which it gashed and tore,
and wanted little of breaking all his bones, so rude was the shock. But in
this extremity she prompted him that never failed him at need. Minerva
(who is wisdom itself) put it into his thoughts no longer to keep swimming
off and on, as one dallying with danger, but boldly to force the shore
that threatened him, and to hug the rock that had torn him so rudely;
which with both hands he clasped, wrestling with extremity, till the rage
of that billow which had driven him upon it was passed; but then again the
rock drove back that wave so furiously that it reft him of his hold,
sucking him with it in its return; and the sharp rock, his cruel friend,
to which he clung for succour, rent the flesh so sore from his hands in
parting that he fell off, and could sustain no longer; quite under water
he fell, and, past the help of fate, there had the hapless Ulysses lost
all portion that he had in this life, if Minerva had not prompted his
wisdom in that peril to essay another course, and to explore some other
shelter, ceasing to attempt that landing-place.
She guided his wearied and nigh-exhausted limbs to the mouth of the fair
river Callicoe, which not far from thence disbursed its watery tribute to
the ocean. Here the shores were easy and accessible, and the rocks, which
rather adorned than defended its banks, so smooth that they seemed
polished of purpose to invite the landing of our sea-wanderer, and to
atone for the uncourteous treatment which those less hospitable cliffs had
afforded him. And the god of the river, as if in pity, stayed his current,
and smoothed his waters, to make his landing more easy; for sacred to the
ever-living deities of the fresh waters, be they mountain-stream, river,
or lake, is the cry of erring mortals that seek their aid, by reason that,
being inland-bred, they partake more of the gentle humanities of our
nature than those marine deities whom Neptune trains up in tempests in the
unpitying recesses of his salt abyss.
So by the favour of the river's god Ulysses crept to land half-drowned;
both his knees faltering, his strong hands falling down through weakness
from the excessive toils he had endured, his cheeks and nostrils flowing
with froth of the sea-brine, much of which he had swallowed in that
conflict, voice and breath spent, down he sank as in death. Dead weary he
was. It seemed that the sea had soaked through his heart, and the pains he
felt in all his veins were little less than those which one feels that has
endured the torture of the rack. But when his spirits came a little to
themselves, and his recollection by degrees began to return, he rose up,
and unloosing from his waist the girdle or charm which that divine bird
had given him, and remembering the charge which he had received with it,
he flung it far from him into the river. Back it swam with the course of
the ebbing stream till it reached the sea, where the fair hands of Ino
Leucothea received it to keep it as a pledge of safety to any future
shipwrecked mariner that, like Ulysses, should wander in those perilous
waves.
Then he kissed the humble earth in token of safety, and on he went by the
side of that pleasant river, till he came where a thicker shade of rushes
that grew on its banks seemed to point out the place where he might rest
his sea-wearied limbs. And here a fresh perplexity divided his mind,
whether he should pass the night, which was coming on, in that place,
where, though he feared no other enemies, the damps and frosts of the
chill sea-air in that exposed situation might be death to him in his weak
state; or whether he had better climb the next hill, and pierce the depth
of some shady wood, in which he might find a warm and sheltered though
insecure repose, subject to the approach of any wild beast that roamed
that way. Best did this last course appear to him, though with some
danger, as that which was more honourable and savoured more of strife and
self-exertion than to perish without a struggle the passive victim of cold
and the elements.
So he bent his course to the nearest woods, where, entering in, he found a
thicket, mostly of wild olives and such low trees, yet growing so
intertwined and knit together that the moist wind had not leave to play
through their branches, nor the sun's scorching beams to pierce their
recesses, nor any shower to beat through, they grew so thick, and as it
were folded each in the other; here creeping in, he made his bed of the
leaves which were beginning to fall, of which was such abundance that two
or three men might have spread them ample coverings, such as might shield
them from the winter's rage, though the air breathed steel and blew as it
would burst. Here creeping in, he heaped up store of leaves all about him,
as a man would billets upon a winter fire, and lay down in the midst. Rich
seed of virtue lying hid in poor leaves! Here Minerva soon gave him sound
sleep; and here all his long toils past seemed to be concluded and shut up
within the little sphere of his refreshed and closed eyelids.
</chapter>
<chapter title="CHAPTER SIX">
The Princess Nausicaa.--The Washing.--The Game with the Ball.--The Court
of Phaeacia and King Alcinous.
Meantime Minerva, designing an interview between the king's daughter of
that country and Ulysses when he should awake, went by night to the palace
of king Alcinous, and stood at the bedside of the princess Nausicaa in the
shape of one of her favourite attendants, and thus addressed the sleeping
princess:
"Nausicaa, why do you lie sleeping here, and never bestow a thought upon
your bridal ornaments, of which you have many and beautiful, laid up in
your wardrobe against the day of your marriage, which cannot be far
distant; when you shall have need of all, not only to deck your own
person, but to give away in presents to the virgins that honouring you
shall attend you to the temple? Your reputation stands much upon the
timely care of these things; these things are they which fill father and
reverend mother with delight. Let us arise betimes to wash your fair
vestments of linen and silks in the river; and request your sire to lend
you mules and a coach, for your wardrobe is heavy, and the place where we
must wash is distant, and besides it fits not a great princess like you to
go so far on foot."
So saying, she went away, and Nausicaa awoke, full of pleasing thoughts of
her marriage, which the dream had told her was not far distant; and as
soon as it was dawn she arose and dressed herself, and went to find her
parents.
The queen her mother was already up, and seated among her maids, spinning
at her wheel, as the fashion was in those primitive times, when great
ladies did not disdain housewifery: and the king her father was preparing
to go abroad at that early hour to council with his grave senate.
"My father," she said, "will you not order mules and a coach to be got
ready, that I may go and wash, I and my maids, at the cisterns that stand
without the city?"
"What washing does my daughter speak of?" said Alcinous.
"Mine and my brothers' garments," she replied, "that have contracted soil
by this time with lying by so long in the wardrobe. Five sons have you
that are my brothers; two of them are married, and three are bachelors;
these last it concerns to have their garments neat and unsoiled; it may
advance their fortunes in marriage: and who but I their sister should have
a care of these things? You yourself, my father, have need of the whitest
apparel when you go, as now, to the council."
She used this plea, modestly dissembling her care of her own nuptials to
her father; who was not displeased at this instance of his daughter's
discretion; for a seasonable care about marriage may be permitted to a
young maiden, provided it be accompanied with modesty and dutiful
submission to her parents in the choice of her future husband; and there
was no fear of Nausicaa choosing wrongly or improperly, for she was as
wise as she was beautiful, and the best in all Phaeacia were suitors to
her for her love. So Alcinous readily gave consent that she should go,
ordering mules and a coach to be prepared. And Nausicaa brought from her
chamber all her vestments, and laid them up in the coach, and her mother
placed bread and wine in the coach, and oil in a golden cruse, to soften
the bright skins of Nausicaa and her maids when they came out of the
river.
Nausicaa, making her maids get up into the coach with her, lashed the
mules, till they brought her to the cisterns which stood a little on the
outside of the town, and were supplied with water from the river Callicoe.
There her attendants unyoked the mules, took out the clothes, and steeped
them in the cisterns, washing them in several waters, and afterwards
treading them clean with their feet, venturing wagers who should have done
soonest and cleanest, and using many pretty pastimes to beguile their
labours as young maids use, while the princess looked on. When they had
laid their clothes to dry, they fell to playing again, and Nausicaa joined
them in a game with the ball, which is used in that country, which is
performed by tossing the ball from hand to hand with great expedition, she
who begins the pastime singing a song. It chanced that the princess, whose
turn it became to toss the ball, sent it so far from its mark that it fell
beyond into one of the cisterns of the river; at which the whole company,
in merry consternation, set up a shriek so loud as waked the sleeping
Ulysses, who was taking his rest after his long toils in the woods not far
distant from the place where these young maids had come to wash.
[Illustration: _And Nausicaa joined them in a game with the ball_.]
At the sound of female voices Ulysses crept forth from his retirement,
making himself a covering with boughs and leaves as well as he could to
shroud his nakedness. The sudden appearance of his weather-beaten and
almost naked form so frighted the maidens that they scudded away into the
woods and all about to hide themselves, only Minerva (who had brought
about this interview to admirable purposes, by seemingly accidental means)
put courage into the breast of Nausicaa, and she stayed where she was, and
resolved to know what manner of man he was, and what was the occasion of
his strange coming to them.
He not venturing (for delicacy) to approach and clasp her knees, as
suppliants should, but standing far off, addressed this speech to the
young princess:
"Before I presume rudely to press my petitions, I should first ask whether
I am addressing a mortal woman, or one of the goddesses. If a goddess, you
seem to me to be likest to Diana, the chaste huntress, the daughter of
Jove. Like hers are your lineaments, your stature, your features, and air
divine."
She making answer that she was no goddess, but a mortal maid, he
continued:
"If a woman, thrice blessed are both the authors of your birth, thrice
blessed are your brothers, who even to rapture must have joy in your
perfections, to see you grown so like a young tree, and so graceful. But
most blessed of all that breathe is he that has the gift to engage your
young neck in the yoke of marriage. I never saw that man that was worthy
of you. I never saw man or woman that at all parts equalled you. Lately at
Delos (where I touched) I saw a young palm which grew beside Apollo's
temple; it exceeded all the trees which ever I beheld for straightness and
beauty: I can compare you only to that. A stupor past admiration strikes
me, joined with fear, which keeps me back from approaching you, to embrace
your knees. Nor is it strange; for one of freshest and firmest spirit
would falter, approaching near to so bright an object: but I am one whom a
cruel habit of calamity has prepared to receive strong impressions. Twenty
days the unrelenting seas have tossed me up and down coming from Ogygia,
and at length cast me shipwrecked last night upon your coast. I have seen
no man or woman since I landed but yourself. All that I crave is clothes,
which you may spare me, and to be shown the way to some neighbouring town.
The gods, who have care of strangers, will requite you for these
courtesies."
She, admiring to hear such complimentary words proceed out of the mouth of
one whose outside looked so rough and unpromising, made answer: "Stranger,
I discern neither sloth nor folly in you, and yet I see that you are poor
and wretched: from which I gather that neither wisdom nor industry can
secure felicity; only Jove bestows it upon whomsoever he pleases. He
perhaps has reduced you to this plight. However, since your wanderings
have brought you so near to our city, it lies in our duty to supply your
wants. Clothes and what else a human hand should give to one so suppliant,
and so tamed with calamity, you shall not want. We will show you our city
and tell you the name of our people. This is the land of the Phaeacians,
of which my father, Alcinous, is king."
Then calling her attendants, who had dispersed on the first sight of
Ulysses, she rebuked them for their fear, and said: "This man is no
Cyclop, nor monster of sea or land, that you should fear him; but he seems
manly, staid, and discreet, and though decayed in his outward appearance,
yet he has the mind's riches, wit and fortitude, in abundance. Show him
the cisterns, where he may wash him from the sea-weeds and foam that hang
about him, and let him have garments that fit him out of those which we
have brought with us to the cisterns."
Ulysses, retiring a little out of sight, cleansed him in the cisterns from
the soil and impurities with which the rocks and waves had covered all his
body, and clothing himself with befitting raiment, which the princess's
attendants had given him, he presented himself in more worthy shape to
Nausicaa. She admired to see what a comely personage he was, now he was
dressed in all parts; she thought him some king or hero: and secretly
wished that the gods would be pleased to give her such a husband.
Then causing her attendants to yoke her mules, and lay up the vestments,
which the sun's heat had sufficiently dried, in the coach, she ascended
with her maids and drove off to the palace, bidding Ulysses, as she
departed, keep an eye upon the coach, and to follow it on foot at some
distance: which she did, because if she had suffered him to have rode in
the coach with her, it might have subjected her to some misconstructions
of the common people, who are always ready to vilify and censure their
betters, and to suspect that charity is not always pure charity, but that
love or some sinister intention lies hid under its disguise. So discreet
and attentive to appearance in all her actions was this admirable
princess.
Ulysses as he entered the city wondered to see its magnificence, its
markets, buildings, temples; its walls and rampires; its trade, and resort
of men; its harbours for shipping, which is the strength of the Phaeacian
state. But when he approached the palace, and beheld its riches, the
proportion of its architecture, its avenues, gardens, statues, fountains,
he stood rapt in admiration, and almost forgot his own condition in
surveying the flourishing estate of others; but recollecting himself, he
passed on boldly into the inner apartment, where the king and queen were
sitting at dinner with their peers, Nausicaa having prepared them for his
approach.
To them humbly kneeling, he made it his request that, since fortune had
cast him naked upon their shores, they would take him into their
protection, and grant him a conveyance by one of the ships of which their
great Phaeacian state had such good store, to carry him to his own
country. Having delivered his request, to grace it with more humility he
went and sat himself down upon the hearth among the ashes, as the custom
was in those days when any would make a petition to the throne.
He seemed a petitioner of so great state and of so superior a deportment
that Alcinous himself arose to do him honour, and causing him to leave
that abject station which he had assumed, placed him next to his throne,
upon a chair of state, and thus he spake to his peers:
"Lords and councillors of Phaeacia, ye see this man, who he is we know
not, that is come to us in the guise of a petitioner: he seems no mean
one; but whoever he is, it is fit, since the gods have cast him upon our
protection, that we grant him the rites of hospitality while he stays with
us, and at his departure a ship well manned to convey so worthy a
personage as he seems to be, in a manner suitable to his rank, to his own
country."
This counsel the peers with one consent approved; and wine and meat being
set before Ulysses, he ate and drank, and gave the gods thanks who had
stirred up the royal bounty of Alcinous to aid him in that extremity. But
not as yet did he reveal to the king and queen who he was, or whence he
had come; only in brief terms he related his being cast upon their shores,
his sleep in the woods, and his meeting with the princess Nausicaa, whose
generosity, mingled with discretion, filled her parents with delight, as
Ulysses in eloquent phrases adorned and commended her virtues. But
Alcinous, humanely considering that the troubles which his guest had
undergone required rest, as well as refreshment by food, dismissed him
early in the evening to his chamber; where in a magnificent apartment
Ulysses found a smoother bed, but not a sounder repose, than he had
enjoyed the night before, sleeping upon leaves which he had scraped
together in his necessity.
</chapter>
<chapter title="CHAPTER SEVEN">
The Songs of Demodocus.--The Convoy Home.--The Mariners Transformed to
Stone.--The Young Shepherd.
When it was daylight, Alcinous caused it to be proclaimed by the heralds
about the town that there was come to the palace a stranger, shipwrecked
on their coast, that in mien and person resembled a god; and inviting all
the chief people of the city to come and do honour to the stranger.
The palace was quickly filled with guests, old and young, for whose cheer,
and to grace Ulysses more, Alcinous made a kingly feast with banquetings
and music. Then, Ulysses being seated at a table next the king and queen,
in all men's view, after they had feasted Alcinous ordered Demodocus, the
court-singer, to be called to sing some song of the deeds of heroes, to
charm the ear of his guest. Demodocus came and reached his harp, where it
hung between two pillars of silver; and then the blind singer, to whom, in
recompense of his lost sight, the muses had given an inward discernment, a
soul and a voice to excite the hearts of men and gods to delight, began in
grave and solemn strains to sing the glories of men highliest famed. He
chose a poem whose subject was The Stern Strife stirred up between Ulysses
and Great Achilles, as at a banquet sacred to the gods, in dreadful
language, they expressed their difference; while Agamemnon sat rejoiced in
soul to hear those Grecians jar; for the oracle in Pytho had told him that
the period of their wars in Troy should then be, when the kings of Greece,
anxious to arrive at the wished conclusion, should fall to strife, and
contend which must end the war, force or stratagem.
This brave contention he expressed so to the life, in the very words which
they both used in the quarrel, as brought tears into the eyes of Ulysses
at the remembrance of past passages of his life, and he held his large
purple weed before his face to conceal it. Then craving a cup of wine, he
poured it out in secret libation to the gods, who had put into the mind of
Demodocus unknowingly to do him so much honour. But when the moving poet
began to tell of other occurrences where Ulysses had been present, the
memory of his brave followers who had been with him in all difficulties,
now swallowed up and lost in the ocean, and of those kings that had fought
with him at Troy, some of whom were dead, some exiles like himself, forced
itself so strongly upon his mind that forgetful where he was he sobbed
outright with passion: which yet he restrained, but not so cunningly but
Alcinous perceived it and without taking notice of it to Ulysses,
privately gave signs that Demodocus should cease from his singing.
Next followed dancing in the Phaeacian fashion, when they would show
respect to their guests; which was succeeded by trials of skill, games of
strength, running, racing, hurling of the quoit, mock fights, hurling of
the javelin, shooting with the bow: in some of which Ulysses modestly
challenging his entertainers, performed such feats of strength and prowess
as gave the admiring Phaeacians fresh reason to imagine that he was either
some god, or hero of the race of the gods.
These solemn shows and pageants in honour of his guest king Alcinous
continued for the space of many days, as if he could never be weary of
showing courtesies to so worthy a stranger. In all this time he never
asked him his name, nor sought to know more of him than he of his own
accord disclosed; till on a day as they were seated feasting, after the
feast was ended, Demodocus being called, as was the custom, to sing some
grave matter, sang how Ulysses, on that night when Troy was fired, made
dreadful proof of his valour, maintaining singly a combat against the
whole household of Deiphobus, to which the divine expresser gave both act
and passion, and breathed such a fire into Ulysses's deeds that it
inspired old death with life in the lively expressing of slaughters, and
rendered life so sweet and passionate in the hearers that all who heard
felt it fleet from them in the narration: which made Ulysses even pity his
own slaughterous deeds, and feel touches of remorse, to see how song can
revive a dead man from the grave, yet no way can it defend a living man
from death; and in imagination he underwent some part of death's horrors,
and felt in his living body a taste of those dying pangs which he had
dealt to others; that with the strong conceit, tears (the true
interpreters of unutterable emotion) stood in his eyes.
Which king Alcinous noting, and that this was now the second time that he
had perceived him to be moved at the mention of events touching the Trojan
wars, he took occasion to ask whether his guest had lost any friend or
kinsman at Troy, that Demodocus's singing had brought into his mind. Then
Ulysses, drying the tears with his cloak, and observing that the eyes of
all the company were upon him, desirous to give them satisfaction in what
he could, and thinking this a fit time to reveal his true name and
destination, spake as follows:
"The courtesies which ye all have shown me, and in particular yourself and
princely daughter, O king Alcinous, demand from me that I should no longer
keep you in ignorance of what or who I am; for to reserve any secret from
you, who have with such openness of friendship embraced my love, would
argue either a pusillanimous or an ungrateful mind in me. Know, then, that
I am that Ulysses, of whom I perceive ye have heard something; who
heretofore have filled the world with the renown of my policies. I am he
by whose counsels, if Fame is to be believed at all, more than by the
united valour of all the Grecians, Troy fell. I am that unhappy man whom
the heavens and angry gods have conspired to keep an exile on the seas,
wandering to seek my home, which still flies from me. The land which I am
in quest of is Ithaca; in whose ports some ship belonging to your
navigation-famed Phaeacian state may haply at some time have found a
refuge from tempests. If ever you have experienced such kindness, requite
it now, by granting to me, who am the king of that land, a passport to
that land."
Admiration seized all the court of Alcinous, to behold in their presence
one of the number of those heroes who fought at Troy, whose divine story
had been made known to them by songs and poems, but of the truth they had
little known, or rather they had hitherto accounted those heroic exploits
as fictions and exaggerations of poets; but having seen and made proof of
the real Ulysses, they began to take those supposed inventions to be real
verities, and the tale of Troy to be as true as it was delightful.
Then king Alcinous made answer: "Thrice fortunate ought we to esteem our
lot, in having seen and conversed with a man of whom report hath spoken so
loudly, but, as it seems, nothing beyond the truth. Though we could desire
no felicity greater than to have you always among us, renowned Ulysses,
yet your desire having been expressed so often and so deeply to return
home, we can deny you nothing, though to our own loss. Our kingdom of
Phaeacia, as you know, is chiefly rich in shipping. In all parts of the
world, where there are navigable seas, or ships can pass, our vessels will
be found. You cannot name a coast to which they do not resort. Every rock
and every quicksand is known to them that lurks in the vast deep. They
pass a bird in flight; and with such unerring certainty they make to their
destination that some have said that they have no need of pilot or rudder,
but that they move instinctively, self-directed, and know the minds of
their voyagers. Thus much, that you may not fear to trust yourself in one
of our Phaeacian ships. Tomorrow, if you please, you shall launch forth.
To-day spend with us in feasting, who never can do enough when the gods
send such visitors."
Ulysses acknowledged king Alcinous's bounty; and while these two royal
personages stood interchanging courteous expressions, the heart of the
princess Nausicaa was overcome: she had been gazing attentively upon her
father's guest as he delivered his speech; but when he came to that part
where he declared himself to be Ulysses, she blessed herself and her
fortune that in relieving a poor shipwrecked mariner, as he seemed no
better, she had conferred a kindness on so divine a hero as he proved; and
scarce waiting till her father had done speaking, with a cheerful
countenance she addressed Ulysses, bidding him be cheerful, and when he
returned home, as by her father's means she trusted he would shortly,
sometimes to remember to whom he owed his life, and who met him in the
woods by the river Callicoe.
"Fair flower of Phaeacia," he replied, "so may all the gods bless me with
the strife of joys in that desired day, whenever I shall see it, as I
shall always acknowledge to be indebted to your fair hand for the gift of
life which I enjoy, and all the blessings which shall follow upon my
home-return. The gods give thee, Nausicaa, a princely husband; and from
you two spring blessings to this state." So prayed Ulysses, his heart
overflowing with admiration and grateful recollections of king Alcinous's
daughter.
Then at the king's request he gave them a brief relation of all the
adventures that had befallen him since he launched forth from Troy; during
which the princess Nausicaa took great delight (as ladies are commonly
taken with these kind of travellers' stories) to hear of the monster
Polyphemus, of the men that devour each other in Laestrygonia, of the
enchantress Circe, of Scylla, and the rest; to which she listened with a
breathless attention, letting fall a shower of tears from her fair eyes
every now and then, when Ulysses told of some more than usual distressful
passage in his travels; and all the rest of his auditors, if they had
before entertained a high respect for their guest, now felt their
veneration increased tenfold, when they learned from his own mouth what
perils, what sufferance, what endurance, of evils beyond man's strength to
support, this much-sustaining, almost heavenly man, by the greatness of
his mind, and by his invincible courage, had struggled through.
[Illustration: _He gave them a brief relation of all the adventures that
had befallen him_.]
The night was far spent before Ulysses had ended his narrative, and with
wishful glances he cast his eyes towards the eastern parts, which the sun
had begun to flecker with his first red; for on the morrow Alcinous had
promised that a bark should be in readiness to convoy him to Ithaca.
In the morning a vessel well manned and appointed was waiting for him;
into which the king and queen heaped presents of gold and silver, massy
plate, apparel, armour, and whatsoever things of cost or rarity they
judged would be most acceptable to their guest; and the sails being set,
Ulysses, embarking with expressions of regret, took his leave of his royal
entertainers, of the fair princess (who had been his first friend), and of
the peers of Phaeacia; who crowding down to the beach to have the last
sight of their illustrious visitant, beheld the gallant ship with all her
canvas spread, bounding and curveting over the waves, like a horse proud
of his rider, or as if she knew that in her capacious womb's rich
freightage she bore Ulysses.
He whose life past had been a series of disquiets, in seas among rude
waves, in battles amongst ruder foes, now slept securely, forgetting all;
his eye-lids bound in such deep sleep as only yielded to death; and when
they reached the nearest Ithacan port by the next morning, he was still
asleep. The mariners, not willing to awake him, landed him softly, and
laid him in a cave at the foot of an olive-tree, which made a shady recess
in that narrow harbour, the haunt of almost none but the sea-nymphs, which
are called Naiads; few ships before this Phaeacian vessel having put into
that haven, by reason of the difficulty and narrowness of the entrance.
Here leaving him asleep, and disposing in safe places near him the
presents with which king Alcinous had dismissed him, they departed for
Phaeacia; where these wretched mariners never again set foot; but just as
they arrived, and thought to salute their country earth, in sight of their
city's turrets, and in open view of their friends who from the harbour
with shouts greeted their return, their vessel and all the mariners which
were in her were turned to stone, and stood transformed and fixed in sight
of the whole Phaeacian city, where it yet stands, by Neptune's vindictive
wrath; who resented thus highly the contempt which those Phaeacians had
shown in convoying home a man whom the god had destined to destruction.
Whence it comes to pass that the Phaeacians at this day will at no price
be induced to lend their ships to strangers, or to become the carriers for
other nations, so highly do they still dread the displeasure of their
sea-god, while they see that terrible monument ever in sight.
When Ulysses awoke, which was not till some time after the mariners had
departed, he did not at first know his country again, either that long
absence had made it strange, or that Minerva (which was more likely) had
cast a cloud about his eyes, that he should have greater pleasure
hereafter in discovering his mistake; but like a man suddenly awaking in
some desert isle, to which his sea-mates have transported him in his
sleep, he looked around, and discerning no known objects, he cast his
hands to heaven for pity, and complained on those ruthless men who had
beguiled him with a promise of conveying him home to this country, and
perfidiously left him to perish in an unknown land. But then the rich
presents of gold and silver given him by Alcinous, which he saw carefully
laid up in secure places near him, staggered him: which seemed not like
the act of wrongful or unjust men, such as turn pirates for gain, or land
helpless passengers in remote coasts to possess themselves of their goods.
While he remained in this suspense, there came up to him a young shepherd,
clad in the finer sort of apparel, such as kings' sons wore in those days
when princes did not disdain to tend sheep, who, accosting him, was
saluted again by Ulysses, who asked him what country that was on which he
had been just landed, and whether it were part of a continent, or an
island. The young shepherd made show of wonder, to hear any one ask the
name of that land; as country people are apt to esteem those for mainly
ignorant and barbarous who do not know the names of places which are
familiar to _them_, though perhaps they who ask have had no opportunities
of knowing, and may have come from far countries.
"I had thought," said he, "that all people knew our land. It is rocky and
barren, to be sure; but well enough: it feeds a goat or an ox well; it is
not wanting either in wine or in wheat; it has good springs of water, some
fair rivers; and wood enough, as you may see: it is called Ithaca."
Ulysses was joyed enough to find himself in his own country; but so
prudently he carried his joy, that, dissembling his true name and quality,
he pretended to the shepherd that he was only some foreigner who by stress
of weather had put into that port; and framed on the sudden a story to
make it plausible, how he had come from Crete in a ship of Phaeacia; when
the young shepherd, laughing, and taking Ulysses's hand in both his, said
to him: "He must be cunning, I find, who thinks to overreach you. What,
cannot you quit your wiles and your subtleties, now that you are in a
state of security? must the first word with which you salute your native
earth be an untruth? and think you that you are unknown?"
Ulysses looked again; and he saw, not a shepherd, but a beautiful woman,
whom he immediately knew to be the goddess Minerva, that in the wars of
Troy had frequently vouchsafed her sight to him; and had been with him
since in perils, saving him unseen.
"Let not my ignorance offend thee, great Minerva," he cried, "or move thy
displeasure, that in that shape I knew thee not; since the skill of
discerning of deities is not attainable by wit or study, but hard to be
hit by the wisest of mortals. To know thee truly through all thy changes
is only given to those whom thou art pleased to grace. To all men thou
takest all likenesses. All men in their wits think that they know thee,
and that they have thee. Thou art wisdom itself. But a semblance of thee,
which is false wisdom, often is taken for thee, so thy counterfeit view
appears to many, but thy true presence to few: those are they which,
loving thee above all, are inspired with light from thee to know thee. But
this I surely know, that all the time the sons of Greece waged war against
Troy, I was sundry times graced with thy appearance; but since, I have
never been able to set eyes upon thee till now; but have wandered at my
own discretion, to myself a blind guide, erring up and down the world,
wanting thee."
Then Minerva cleared his eyes, and he knew the ground on which he stood to
be Ithaca, and that cave to be the same which the people of Ithaca had in
former times made sacred to the sea-nymphs, and where he himself had done
sacrifices to them a thousand times; and full in his view stood Mount
Nerytus with all his woods: so that now he knew for a certainty that he
was arrived in his own country, and with the delight which he felt he
could not forbear stooping down and kissing the soil.
</chapter>
<chapter title="CHAPTER EIGHT">
The Change from a King to a Beggar.--Eumaeus and the Herdsmen.--
Telemachus.
Not long did Minerva suffer him to indulge vain transports; but briefly
recounting to him the events which had taken place in Ithaca during his
absence, she showed him that his way to his wife and throne did not lie so
open, but that before he were reinstated in the secure possession of them
he must encounter many difficulties. His palace, wanting its king, was
become the resort of insolent and imperious men, the chief nobility of
Ithaca and of the neighboring isles, who, in the confidence of Ulysses
being dead, came as suitors to Penelope. The queen (it was true) continued
single, but was little better than a state-prisoner in the power of these
men, who, under a pretence of waiting her decision, occupied the king's
house rather as owners than guests, lording and domineering at their
pleasure, profaning the palace and wasting the royal substance with their
feasts and mad riots. Moreover, the goddess told him how, fearing the
attempts of these lawless men upon the person of his young son Telemachus,
she herself had put it into the heart of the prince to go and seek his
father in far countries; how in the shape of Mentor she had borne him
company in his long search; which, though failing, as she meant it should
fail, in its first object, had yet had this effect, that through hardships
he had learned endurance, through experience he had gathered wisdom, and
wherever his footsteps had been he had left such memorials of his worth as
the fame of Ulysses's son was already blown throughout the world. That it
was now not many days since Telemachus had arrived in the island, to the
great joy of the queen his mother, who had thought him dead, by reason of
his long absence, and had begun to mourn for him with a grief equal to
that which she endured for Ulysses: the goddess herself having so ordered
the course of his adventures that the time of his return should correspond
with the return of Ulysses, that they might together concert measures how
to repress the power and insolence of those wicked suitors. This the
goddess told him; but of the particulars of his son's adventures, of his
having been detained in the Delightful Island, which his father had so
lately left, of Calypso and her nymphs, and the many strange occurrences
which may be read with profit and delight in the history of the prince's
adventures, she forbore to tell him as yet, as judging that he would hear
them with greater pleasure from the lips of his son, when he should have
him in an hour of stillness and safety, when their work should be done,
and none of their enemies left alive to trouble them.
[Illustration: _Consulting how they might with safety bring about his
restoration_.]
Then they sat down, the goddess and Ulysses, at the foot of a wild
olive-tree, consulting how they might with safety bring about his
restoration. And when Ulysses revolved in his mind how that his enemies
were a multitude, and he single, he began to despond, and he said, "I shall
die an ill death like Agamemnon; in the threshold of my own house I shall
perish, like that unfortunate monarch, slain by some one of my wife's
suitors." But then again calling to mind his ancient courage, he secretly
wished that Minerva would but breathe such a spirit into his bosom as she
inflamed him with in the hour of Troy's destruction, that he might
encounter with three hundred of those impudent suitors at once, and strew
the pavements of his beautiful palace with their bloods and brains.
And Minerva knew his thoughts, and she said, "I will be strongly with
thee, if thou fail not to do thy part. And for a sign between us that I
will perform my promise and for a token on thy part of obedience, I must
change thee, that thy person may not be known of men."
Then Ulysses bowed his head to receive the divine impression, and Minerva
by her great power changed his person so that it might not be known. She
changed him to appearance into a very old man, yet such a one as by his
limbs and gait seemed to have been some considerable person in his time,
and to retain yet some remains of his once prodigious strength. Also,
instead of those rich robes in which king Alcinous had clothed him, she
threw over his limbs such old and tattered rags as wandering beggars
usually wear. A staff supported his steps, and a scrip hung to his back,
such as travelling mendicants used to hold the scraps which are given to
them at rich men's doors. So from a king he became a beggar, as wise
Tiresias had predicted to him in the shades.
To complete his humiliation, and to prove his obedience by suffering, she
next directed him in his beggarly attire to go and present himself to his
old herdsman Eumaeus, who had the care of his swine and his cattle, and
had been a faithful steward to him all the time of his absence. Then
strictly charging Ulysses that he should reveal himself to no man, but to
his own son, whom she would send to him when she saw occasion, the goddess
went her way.
The transformed Ulysses bent his course to the cottage of the herdsman,
and, entering in at the front court, the dogs, of which Eumaeus kept many
fierce ones for the protection of the cattle, flew with open mouths upon
him, as those ignoble animals have oftentimes an antipathy to the sight of
anything like a beggar, and would have rent him in pieces with their
teeth, if Ulysses had not had the prudence to let fall his staff, which
had chiefly provoked their fury, and sat himself down in a careless
fashion upon the ground; but for all that some serious hurt had certainly
been done to him, so raging the dogs were, had not the herdsman, whom the
barking of the dogs had fetched out of the house, with shouting and with
throwing of stones repressed them.
He said, when he saw Ulysses, "Old father, how near you were to being torn
in pieces by these rude dogs! I should never have forgiven myself, if
through neglect of mine any hurt had happened to you. But Heaven has given
me so many cares to my portion that I might well be excused for not
attending to everything: while here I lie grieving and mourning for the
absence of that majesty which once ruled here, and am forced to fatten his
swine and his cattle for food to evil men, who hate him and who wish his
death; when he perhaps strays up and down the world, and has not wherewith
to appease hunger, if indeed he yet lives (which is a question) and enjoys
the cheerful light of the sun." This he said, little thinking that he of
whom he spoke now stood before him, and that in that uncouth disguise and
beggarly obscurity was present the hidden majesty of Ulysses.
Then he had his guest into the house, and sat meat and drink before him;
and Ulysses said, "May Jove and all the other gods requite you for the
kind speeches and hospitable usage which you have shown me!"
Eumaeus made answer, "My poor guest, if one in much worse plight than
yourself had arrived here, it were a shame to such scanty means as I have
if I had let him depart without entertaining him to the best of my
ability. Poor men, and such as have no houses of their own, are by Jove
himself recommended to our care. But the cheer which we that are servants
to other men have to bestow is but sorry at most, yet freely and lovingly
I give it you. Indeed, there once ruled here a man, whose return the gods
have set their faces against, who, if he had been suffered to reign in
peace and grow old among us, would have been kind to me and mine. But he
is gone; and for his sake would to God that the whole posterity of Helen
might perish with her, since in her quarrel so many worthies have
perished! But such as your fare is, eat it, and be welcome--such lean
beasts as are food for poor herdsmen. The fattest go to feed the voracious
stomachs of the queen's suitors. Shame on their unworthiness! there is no
day in which two or three of the noblest of the herd are not slain to
support their feasts and their surfeits."
[Illustration: '_But such as your fare is, eat it, and be welcome_.']
Ulysses gave good ear to his words; and as he ate his meat, he even tore
it and rent it with his teeth, for mere vexation that his fat cattle
should be slain to glut the appetites of those godless suitors. And he
said, "What chief or what ruler is this, that thou commendest so highly,
and sayest that he perished at Troy? I am but a stranger in these parts.
It may be I have heard of some such in my long travels."
Eumaeus answered, "Old father, never any one of all the strangers that
have come to our coast with news of Ulysses being alive could gain credit
with the queen or her son yet. These travellers, to get raiment or a meal,
will not stick to invent any lie. Truth is not the commodity they deal in.
Never did the queen get anything of them but lies. She receives all that
come graciously, hears their stories, inquires all she can, but all ends
in tears and dissatisfaction. But in God's name, old father, if you have
got a tale, make the most on't, it may gain you a cloak or a coat from
somebody to keep you warm; but for him who is the subject of it, dogs and
vultures long since have torn him limb from limb, or some great fish at
sea has devoured him, or he lieth with no better monument upon his bones
than the sea-sand. But for me past all the race of men were tears created;
for I never shall find so kind a royal master more; not if my father or my
mother could come again and visit me from the tomb, would my eyes be so
blessed, as they should be with the sight of him again, coming as from the
dead. In his last rest my soul shall love him. He is not here, nor do I
name him as a flatterer, but because I am thankful for his love and care
which he had to me a poor man; and if I knew surely that he were past all
shores that the sun shines upon, I would invoke him as a deified thing."
For this saying of Eumaeus the waters stood in Ulysses's eyes, and he
said, "My friend, to say and to affirm positively that he cannot be alive
is to give too much license to incredulity. For, not to speak at random,
but with as much solemnity as an oath comes to, I say to you that Ulysses
shall return; and whenever that day shall be, then shall you give to me a
cloak and a coat; but till then, I will not receive so much as a thread of
a garment, but rather go naked; for no less than the gates of hell do I
hate that man whom poverty can force to tell an untruth. Be Jove then
witness to my words, that this very year, nay, ere this month be fully
ended, your eyes shall behold Ulysses, dealing vengeance in his own palace
upon the wrongers of his wife and his son."
To give the better credence to his words, he amused Eumaeus with a forged
story of his life; feigning of himself that he was a Cretan born, and one
that went with Idomeneus to the wars of Troy. Also he said that he knew
Ulysses, and related various passages which he alleged to have happened
betwixt Ulysses and himself, which were either true in the main, as having
really happened between Ulysses and some other person, or were so like to
truth, as corresponding with the known character and actions of Ulysses,
that Eumaeus's incredulity was not a little shaken. Among other things he
asserted that he had lately been entertained in the court of Thesprotia,
where the king's son of the country had told him that Ulysses had been
there but just before him, and was gone upon a voyage to the oracle of
Jove in Dodona, whence he should shortly return, and a ship would be ready
by the bounty of the Thesprotians to convoy him straight to Ithaca. "And
in token that what I tell you is true," said Ulysses, "if your king come
not within the period which I have named, you shall have leave to give
your servants commandment to take my old carcass, and throw it headlong
from some steep rock into the sea, that poor men, taking example by me,
may fear to lie." But Eumaeus made answer that that should be small
satisfaction or pleasure to him.
So while they sat discoursing in this manner, supper was served in, and
the servants of the herdsman, who had been out all day in the fields, came
in to supper, and took their seats at the fire, for the night was bitter
and frosty. After supper, Ulysses, who had well eaten and drunken, and was
refreshed with the herdsman's good cheer, was resolved to try whether his
host's hospitality would extend to the lending him a good warm mantle or
rug to cover him in the night season; and framing an artful tale for the
purpose, in a merry mood, filling a cup of Greek wine, he thus began:
"I will tell you a story of your king Ulysses and myself. If there is ever
a time when a man may have leave to tell his own stories, it is when he
has drunken a little too much. Strong liquor driveth the fool, and moves
even the heart of the wise, moves and impels him to sing and to dance, and
break forth in pleasant laughters, and perchance to prefer a speech too
which were better kept in. When the heart is open, the tongue will be
stirring. But you shall hear. We led our powers to ambush once under the
walls of Troy."
The herdsmen crowded about him eager to hear anything which related to
their king Ulysses and the wars of Troy, and thus he went on:
"I remember, Ulysses and Menelaus had the direction of that enterprise,
and they were pleased to join me with them in the command. I was at that
time in some repute among men, though fortune has played me a trick since,
as you may perceive. But I was somebody in those times, and could do
something. Be that as it may, a bitter freezing night it was, such a night
as this, the air cut like steel, and the sleet gathered on our shields
like crystal. There was some twenty of us, that lay close crouched down
among the reeds and bulrushes that grew in the moat that goes round the
city. The rest of us made tolerable shift, for every man had been careful
to bring with him a good cloak or mantle to wrap over his armour and keep
himself warm; but I, as it chanced, had left my cloak behind me, as not
expecting that the night would prove so cold, or rather I believe because
I had at that time a brave suit of new armour on, which, being a soldier,
and having some of the soldier's vice about me--_vanity_--I was not
willing should be hidden under a cloak; but I paid for my indiscretion
with my sufferings, for with the inclement night, and the wet of the ditch
in which we lay, I was well-nigh frozen to death; and when I could endure
no longer, I jogged Ulysses who was next to me, and had a nimble ear, and
made known my case to him, assuring him that I must inevitably perish. He
answered in a low whisper, 'Hush, lest any Greek should hear you, and take
notice of your softness.' Not a word more he said, but showed as if he had
no pity for the plight I was in. But he was as considerate as he was
brave; and even then, as he lay with his head reposing upon his hand, he
was meditating how to relieve me, without exposing my weakness to the
soldiers. At last, raising up his head, he made as if he had been asleep,
and said, 'Friends, I have been warned in a dream to send to the fleet to
king Agamemnon for a supply, to recruit our numbers, for we are not
sufficient for this enterprise; and they believing him, one Thoas was
despatched on that errand, who departing, for more speed, as Ulysses had
foreseen, left his upper garment behind him, a good warm mantle, to which
I succeeded, and by the help of it got through the night with credit. This
shift Ulysses made for one in need, and would to heaven that I had now
that strength in my limbs which made me in those days to be accounted fit
to be a leader under Ulysses! I should not then want the loan of a cloak
or a mantle, to wrap about me and shield my old limbs from the night air."
The tale pleased the herdsmen; and Eumaeus, who more than all the rest was
gratified to hear tales of Ulysses, true or false, said that for his story
he deserved a mantle, and a night's lodging, which he should have; and he
spread for him a bed of goat and sheep skins by the fire; and the seeming
beggar, who was indeed the true Ulysses, lay down and slept under that
poor roof, in that abject disguise to which the will of Minerva had
subjected him.
When morning was come, Ulysses made offer to depart, as if he were not
willing to burden his host's hospitality any longer, but said that he
would go and try the humanity of the townsfolk, if any there would bestow
upon him a bit of bread or a cup of drink. Perhaps the queen's suitors (he
said), out of their full feasts, would bestow a scrap on him; for he could
wait at table, if need were, and play the nimble serving-man; he could
fetch wood (he said) or build a fire, prepare roast meat or boiled, mix
the wine with water, or do any of those offices which recommended poor men
like him to services in great men's houses.
"Alas! poor guest," said Eumaeus, "you know not what you speak. What
should so poor and old a man as you do at the suitors' tables? Their light
minds are not given to such grave servitors. They must have youths, richly
tricked out in flowing vests, with curled hair, like so many of Jove's
cupbearers, to fill out the wine to them as they sit at table, and to
shift their trenchers. Their gorged insolence would but despise and make a
mock at thy age. Stay here. Perhaps the queen, or Telemachus, hearing of
thy arrival, may send to thee of their bounty."
As he spake these words, the steps of one crossing the front court were
heard, and a noise of the dogs fawning and leaping about as for joy; by
which token Eumaeus guessed that it was the prince, who, hearing of a
traveller being arrived at Eumaeus's cottage that brought tidings of his
father, was come to search the truth; and Eumaeus said, "It is the tread
of Telemachus, the son of king Ulysses." Before he could well speak the
words, the prince was at the door, whom Ulysses rising to receive,
Telemachus would not suffer that so aged a man, as he appeared, should
rise to do respect to him, but he courteously and reverently took him by
the hand, and inclined his head to him, as if he had surely known that it
was his father indeed; but Ulysses covered his eyes with his hands, that
he might not show the waters which stood in them. And Telemachus said, "Is
this the man who can tell us tidings of the king my father?"
"He brags himself to be a Cretan born," said Eumaeus, "and that he has
been a soldier and a traveller, but whether he speak the truth or not he
alone can tell. But whatsoever he has been, what he is now is apparent.
Such as he appears, I give him to you; do what you will with him; his
boast at present is that he is at the very best a supplicant."
"Be he what he may," said Telemachus, "I accept him at your hands. But
where I should bestow him I know not, seeing that in the palace his age
would not exempt him from the scorn and contempt which my mother's suitors
in their light minds would be sure to fling upon him: a mercy if he
escaped without blows; for they are a company of evil men, whose
profession is wrongs and violence."
Ulysses answered: "Since it is free for any man to speak in presence of
your greatness, I must say that my heart puts on a wolfish inclination to
tear and to devour, hearing your speech, that these suitors should with
such injustice rage, where you should have the rule solely. What should
the cause be? do you wilfully give way to their ill manners? or has your
government been such as has procured ill-will towards you from your
people? or do you mistrust your kinsfolk and friends in such sort as
without trial to decline their aid? A man's kindred are they that he might
trust to when extremities run high."
Telemachus replied: "The kindred of Ulysses are few. I have no brothers to
assist me in the strife. But the suitors are powerful in kindred and
friends. The house of old Arcesius has had this fate from the heavens,
that from old it still has been supplied with single heirs. To Arcesius,
Laertes only was born, from Laertes descended only Ulysses, from Ulysses I
alone have sprung, whom he left so young that from me never comfort arose
to him. But the end of all rests in the hands of the gods."
Then Eumaeus departing to see to some necessary business of his herds,
Minerva took a woman's shape, and stood in the entry of the door, and was
seen to Ulysses, but by his son she was not seen, for the presences of the
gods are invisible save to those to whom they will to reveal themselves.
Nevertheless, the dogs which were about the door saw the goddess, and
durst not bark, but went crouching and licking of the dust for fear. And
giving signs to Ulysses that the time was now come in which he should make
himself known to his son, by her great power she changed back his shape
into the same which it was before she transformed him; and Telemachus, who
saw the change, but nothing of the manner by which it was effected, only
he saw the appearance of a king in the vigour of his age where but just
now he had seen a worn and decrepit beggar, was struck with fear, and
said, "Some god has done this house this honour," and he turned away his
eyes, and would have worshipped. But his father permitted not, but said,
"Look better at me; I am no deity; why put you upon me the reputation of
godhead? I am no more but thy father: I am even he; I am that Ulysses by
reason of whose absence thy youth has been exposed to such wrongs from
injurious men." Then kissed he his son, nor could any longer refrain those
tears which he had held under such mighty restraint before, though they
would ever be forcing themselves out in spite of him; but now, as if their
sluices had burst, they came out like rivers, pouring upon the warm cheeks
of his son. Nor yet by all these violent arguments could Telemachus be
persuaded to believe that it was his father, but he said some deity had
taken that shape to mock him; for he affirmed that it was not in the power
of any man, who is sustained by mortal food, to change his shape so in a
moment from age to youth: for, "but now," said he, "you were all wrinkles,
and were old, and now you look as the gods are pictured."
[Illustration: "_I am no more but thy father: I am even he._"]
His father replied: "Admire, but fear not, and know me to be at all parts
substantially thy father, who in the inner powers of his mind, and the
unseen workings of a father's love to thee, answers to his outward shape
and pretence! There shall no more Ulysseses come here. I am he that after
twenty years' absence, and suffering a world of ill, have recovered at
last the sight of my country earth. It was the will of Minerva that I
should be changed as you saw me. She put me thus together; she puts
together or takes to pieces whom she pleases. It is in the law of her free
power to do it: sometimes to show her favourites under a cloud, and poor,
and again to restore to them their ornaments. The gods raise and throw
down men with ease."
Then Telemachus could hold out no longer, but he gave way now to a full
belief and persuasion, of that which for joy at first he could not credit,
that it was indeed his true and very father that stood before him; and
they embraced, and mingled their tears.
Then said Ulysses, "Tell me who these suitors are, what are their numbers,
and how stands the queen thy mother affected to them?"
"She bears them still in expectation," said Telemachus, "which she never
means to fulfil, that she will accept the hand of some one of them in
second nuptials. For she fears to displease them by an absolute refusal.
So from day to day she lingers them on with hope, which they are content
to bear the deferring of, while they have entertainment at free cost in
our palace."
Then said Ulysses, "Reckon up their numbers that we may know their
strength and ours, if we having none but ourselves may hope to prevail
against them."
"O father," he replied, "I have ofttimes heard of your fame for wisdom,
and of the great strength of your arm, but the venturous mind which your
speeches now indicate moves me even to amazement: for in nowise can it
consist with wisdom or a sound mind that two should try their strengths
against a host. Nor five, or ten, or twice ten strong are these suitors,
but many more by much: from Dulichium came there fifty and two, they and
their servants; twice twelve crossed the seas hither from Samos; from
Zacynthus twice ten; of our native Ithacans, men of chief note, are twelve
who aspire to the bed and crown of Penelope; and all these under one
strong roof--a fearful odds against two! My father, there is need of
caution, lest the cup which your great mind so thirsts to taste of
vengeance prove bitter to yourself in the drinking. And therefore it were
well that we should bethink us of some one who might assist us in this
undertaking."
"Thinkest thou," said his father, "if we had Minerva and the king of skies
to be our friends, would their sufficiencies make strong our part; or must
we look out for some further aid yet?"
"They you speak of are above the clouds," said Telemachus, "and are sound
aids indeed; as powers that not only exceed human, but bear the chiefest
sway among the gods themselves."
Then Ulysses gave directions to his son to go and mingle with the suitors,
and in nowise to impart his secret to any, not even to the queen his
mother, but to hold himself in readiness, and to have his weapons and his
good armour in preparation. And he charged him that when he himself should
come to the palace, as he meant to follow shortly after, and present
himself in his beggar's likeness to the suitors, that whatever he should
see which might grieve his heart, with what foul usage and contumelious
language soever the suitors should receive his father, coming in that
shape, though they should strike and drag him by the heels along the
floors, that he should not stir nor make offer to oppose them, further
than by mild words to expostulate with them, until Minerva from heaven
should give the sign which should be the prelude to their destruction.
And Telemachus, promising to obey his instructions, departed; and the
shape of Ulysses fell to what it had been before, and he became to all
outward appearance a beggar, in base and beggarly attire.
</chapter>
<chapter title="CHAPTER NINE">
The Queen's Suitors.--The Battle of the Beggars.--The Armour Taken Down.--
The Meeting with Penelope.
From the house of Eumaeus the seeming beggar took his way, leaning on his
staff, till he reached the palace, entering in at the hall where the
suitors sat at meat. They in the pride of their feasting began to break
their jests in mirthful manner, when they saw one looking so poor and so
aged approach. He, who expected no better entertainment, was nothing moved
at their behaviour, but, as became the character which he had assumed, in
a suppliant posture crept by turns to every suitor, and held out his hands
for some charity, with such a natural and beggar-resembling grace that he
might seem to have practised begging all his life; yet there was a sort of
dignity in his most abject stoopings, that whoever had seen him would have
said, If it had pleased Heaven that this poor man had been born a king, he
would gracefully have filled a throne. And some pitied him, and some gave
him alms, as their present humours inclined them, but the greater part
reviled him, and bade him begone, as one that spoiled their feast; for the
presence of misery has this power with it, that, while it stays, it can
ash and overturn the mirth even of those who feel no pity or wish to
relieve it: nature bearing this witness of herself in the hearts of the
most obdurate.
[Illustration: _But the greater part reviled him and bade him begone_.]
Now Telemachus sat at meat with the suitors, and knew that it was the king
his father who in that shape begged an alms; and when his father came and
presented himself before him in turn, as he had done to the suitors one by
one, he gave him of his own meat which he had in his dish, and of his own
cup to drink. And the suitors were past measure offended to see a pitiful
beggar, as they esteemed him, to be so choicely regarded by the prince.
Then Antinous, who was a great lord, and of chief note among the suitors,
said, "Prince Telemachus does ill to encourage these wandering beggars,
who go from place to place, affirming that they have been some
considerable persons in their time, filling the ears of such as hearken to
them with lies, and pressing with their bold feet into kings' palaces.
This is some saucy vagabond, some travelling Egyptian."
"I see," said Ulysses, "that a poor man should get but little at your
board; scarce should he get salt from your hands, if he brought his own
meat."
Lord Antinous, indignant to be answered with such sharpness by a supposed
beggar, snatched up a stool, with which he smote Ulysses where the neck
and shoulders join. This usage moved not Ulysses; but in his great heart
he meditated deep evils to come upon them all, which for a time must be
kept close, and he went and sat himself down in the door-way to eat of
that which was given him; and he said, "For life or possessions a man will
fight, but for his belly this man smites. If a poor man has any god to
take his part, my lord Antinous shall not live to be the queen's husband."
Then Antinous raged highly, and threatened to drag him by the heels, and
to rend his rags about his ears, if he spoke another word.
But the other suitors did in nowise approve of the harsh language, nor of
the blow which Antinous had dealt; and some of them said, "Who knows but
one of the deities goes about hid under that poor disguise? for in the
likeness of poor pilgrims the gods have many times descended to try the
dispositions of men, whether they be humane or impious." While these
things passed, Telemachus sat and observed all, but held his peace,
remembering the instructions of his father. But secretly he waited for the
sign which Minerva was to send from heaven.
That day there followed Ulysses to the court one of the common sort of
beggars, Irus by name, one that had received alms beforetime of the
suitors, and was their ordinary sport, when they were inclined (as that
day) to give way to mirth, to see him eat and drink; for he had the
appetite of six men, and was of huge stature and proportions of body; yet
had in him no spirit nor courage of a man. This man, thinking to curry
favour with the suitors, and recommend himself especially to such a great
lord as Antinous was, began to revile and scorn Ulysses, putting foul
language upon him, and fairly challenging him to fight with the fist. But
Ulysses, deeming his railings to be nothing more than jealousy and that
envious disposition which beggars commonly manifest to brothers in their
trade, mildly besought him not to trouble him, but to enjoy that portion
which the liberality of their entertainers gave him, as he did quietly;
seeing that, of their bounty, there was sufficient for all.
But Irus, thinking that this forbearance in Ulysses was nothing more than
a sign of fear, so much the more highly stormed, and bellowed, and
provoked him to fight; and by this time the quarrel had attracted the
notice of the suitors, who with loud laughters and shouting egged on the
dispute, and lord Antinous swore by all the gods it should be a battle,
and that in that hall the strife should be determined. To this the rest of
the suitors with violent clamours acceded, and a circle was made for the
combatants, and a fat goat was proposed as the victor's prize, as at the
Olympic or the Pythian games. Then Ulysses, seeing no remedy, or being not
unwilling that the suitors should behold some proof of that strength which
ere long in their own persons they were to taste of, stripped himself, and
prepared for the combat. But first he demanded that he should have fair
play shown him, that none in that assembly should aid his opponent, or
take part against him, for, being an old man, they might easily crush him
with their strengths. And Telemachus passed his word that no foul play
should be shown him, but that each party should be left to their own
unassisted strengths, and to this he made Antinous and the rest of the
suitors swear.
But when Ulysses had laid aside his garments, and was bare to the waist,
all the beholders admired at the goodly sight of his large shoulders,
being of such exquisite shape and whiteness, and at his great and brawny
bosom, and the youthful strength which seemed to remain in a man thought
so old; and they said, What limbs and what sinews he has! and coward fear
seized on the mind of that great vast beggar, and he dropped his threats,
and his big words, and would have fled, but lord Antinous stayed him, and
threatened him that if he declined the combat, he would put him in a ship,
and land him on the shores where king Echetus reigned, the roughest tyrant
which at that time the world contained, and who had that antipathy to
rascal beggars, such as he, that when any landed on his coast he would
crop their ears and noses and give them to the dogs to tear. So Irus, in
whom fear of king Echetus prevailed above the fear of Ulysses, addressed
himself to fight. But Ulysses, provoked to be engaged in so odious a
strife with a fellow of his base conditions, and loathing longer to be
made a spectacle to entertain the eyes of his foes, with one blow, which
he struck him beneath the ear, so shattered the teeth and jawbone of this
soon baffled coward that he laid him sprawling in the dust, with small
stomach or ability to renew the contest. Then raising him on his feet, he
led him bleeding and sputtering to the door, and put his staff into his
hand, and bade him go use his command upon dogs and swine, but not presume
himself to be lord of the guests another time, nor of the beggary!
The suitors applauded in their vain minds the issue of the contest, and
rioted in mirth at the expense of poor Irus, who they vowed should be
forthwith embarked, and sent to king Echetus; and they bestowed thanks on
Ulysses for ridding the court of that unsavoury morsel, as they called
him; but in their inward souls they would not have cared if Irus had been
victor, and Ulysses had taken the foil, but it was mirth to them to see
the beggars fight. In such pastimes and light entertainments the day wore
away.
When evening was come, the suitors betook themselves to music and dancing.
And Ulysses leaned his back against a pillar from which certain lamps hung
which gave light to the dancers, and he made show of watching the dancers,
but very different thoughts were in his head. And as he stood near the
lamps, the light fell upon his head, which was thin of hair and bald, as
an old man's. And Eurymachus, a suitor, taking occasion from some words
which were spoken before, scoffed, and said, "Now I know for a certainty
that some god lurks under the poor and beggarly appearance of this man,
for, as he stands by the lamps, his sleek head throws beams around it,
like as it were a glory." And another said, "He passes his time, too, not
much unlike the gods, lazily living exempt from labour, taking offerings
of men." "I warrant," said Eurymachus again, "he could not raise a fence
or dig a ditch for his livelihood, if a man would hire him to work in a
garden."
"I wish," said Ulysses, "that you who speak this and myself were to be
tried at any taskwork: that I had a good crooked scythe put in my hand,
that was sharp and strong, and you such another, where the grass grew
longest, to be up by daybreak, mowing the meadows till the sun went down,
not tasting of food till we had finished; or that we were set to plough
four acres in one day of good glebe land, to see whose furrows were
evenest and cleanest; or that we might have one wrestling-bout together;
or that in our right hands a good steel-headed lance were placed, to try
whose blows fell heaviest and thickest upon the adversary's head-piece. I
would cause you such work as you should have small reason to reproach me
with being slack at work. But you would do well to spare me this reproach,
and to save your strength till the owner of this house shall return, till
the day when Ulysses shall return, when returning he shall enter upon his
birthright."
This was a galling speech to those suitors, to whom Ulysses's return was
indeed the thing which they most dreaded; and a sudden fear fell upon
their souls, as if they were sensible of the real presence of that man who
did indeed stand amongst them, but not in that form as they might know
him; and Eurymachus, incensed, snatched a massy cup which stood on a table
near and hurled it at the head of the supposed beggar, and but narrowly
missed the hitting of him; and all the suitors rose, as at once, to thrust
him out of the hall, which they said his beggarly presence and his rude
speeches had profaned. But Telemachus cried to them to forbear, and not to
presume to lay hands upon a wretched man to whom he had promised
protection. He asked if they were mad, to mix such abhorred uproar with
his feasts. He bade them take their food and their wine, to sit up or to
go to bed at their free pleasures, so long as he should give license to
that freedom; but why should they abuse his banquet, or let the words
which a poor beggar spake have power to move their spleens so fiercely'
They bit their lips and frowned for anger to be checked so by a youth;
nevertheless for that time they had the grace to abstain, either for
shame, or that Minerva had infused into them a terror of Ulysses's son.
So that day's feast was concluded without bloodshed, and the suitors,
tired with their sports, departed severally each man to his apartment.
Only Ulysses and Telemachus remained. And now Telemachus, by his father's
direction, went and brought down into the hall armour and lances from the
armoury; for Ulysses said, "On the morrow we shall have need of them." And
moreover he said, "If any one shall ask why you have taken them down, say
it is to clean them and scour them from the rust which they have gathered
since the owner of this house went for Troy." And as Telemachus stood by
the armour, the lights were all gone out, and it was pitch dark, and the
armour gave out glistering beams as of fire, and he said to his father,
"The pillars of the house are on fire." And his father said, "It is the
gods who sit above the stars, and have power to make the night as light as
the day." And he took it for a good omen. And Telemachus fell to cleaning
and sharpening of the lances.
Now Ulysses had not seen his wife Penelope in all the time since his
return; for the queen did not care to mingle with the suitors at their
banquets, but, as became one that had been Ulysses's wife, kept much in
private, spinning and doing her excellent housewiferies among her maids in
the remote apartments of the palace. Only upon solemn days she would come
down and show herself to the suitors. And Ulysses was filled with a
longing desire to see his wife again, whom for twenty years he had not
beheld, and he softly stole through the known passages of his beautiful
house, till he came where the maids were lighting the queen through a
stately gallery that led to the chamber where she slept. And when the
maids saw Ulysses, they said, "It is the beggar who came to the court
to-day, about whom all that uproar was stirred up in the hall: what does he
here?" But Penelope gave commandment that he should be brought before her,
for she said, "It may be that he has travelled, and has heard something
concerning Ulysses."
[Illustration: _Where the maids were lighting the queen through a stately
gallery_.]
Then was Ulysses right glad to hear himself named by his queen, to find
himself in nowise forgotten, nor her great love towards him decayed in all
that time that he had been away And he stood before his queen, and she
knew him not to be Ulysses, but supposed that he had been some poor
traveller. And she asked him of what country he was.
He told her (as he had before told Eumaeus) that he was a Cretan born,
and, however poor and cast down he now seemed, no less a man than brother
to Idomeneus, who was grandson to king Minos; and though he now wanted
bread, he had once had it in his power to feast Ulysses. Then he feigned
how Ulysses, sailing for Troy, was forced by stress of weather to put his
fleet in at a port of Crete, where for twelve days he was his guest, and
entertained by him with all befitting guest-rites. And he described the
very garments which Ulysses had on, by which Penelope knew he had seen her
lord.
In this manner Ulysses told his wife many tales of himself, at most but
painting, but painting so near to the life that the feeling of that which
she took in at her ears became so strong that the kindly tears ran down
her fair cheeks, while she thought upon her lord, dead as she thought him,
and heavily mourned the loss of him whom she missed, whom she could not
find, though in very deed he stood so near her.
Ulysses was moved to see her weep, but he kept his own eyes dry as iron or
horn in their lids, putting a bridle upon his strong passion, that it
should not issue to sight.
Then told he how he had lately been at the court of Thesprotia, and what
he had learned concerning Ulysses there, in order as he had delivered to
Eumaeus; and Penelope was wont to believe that there might be a
possibility of Ulysses being alive, and she said, "I dreamed a dream this
morning. Methought I had twenty household fowl which did eat wheat steeped
in water from my hand, and there came suddenly from the clouds a
crooked-beaked  hawk, who soused on them and killed them all, trussing
their necks; then took his flight back up to the clouds. And in my dream
methought that I wept and made great moan for my fowls, and for the
destruction which the hawk had made; and my maids came about me to comfort
me. And in the height of my griefs the hawk came back, and lighting upon
the beam of my chamber, he said to me in a man's voice, which sounded
strangely even in my dream, to hear a hawk to speak: 'Be of good cheer,'
he said, 'O daughter of Icarius for this is no dream which thou hast seen,
but that which shall happen to thee indeed. Those household fowl, which
thou lamentest so without reason, are the suitors who devour thy
substance, even as thou sawest the fowl eat from thy hand; and the hawk
is thy husband, who is coming to give death to the suitors.' And I awoke,
and went to see to my fowls if they were alive, whom I found eating wheat
from their troughs, all well and safe as before my dream."
Then said Ulysses, "This dream can endure no other interpretation than
that which the hawk gave to it, who is your lord, and who is coming
quickly to effect all that his words told you."
"Your words," she said, "my old guest, are so sweet that would you sit and
please me with your speech, my ears would never let my eyes close their
spheres for very joy of your discourse; but none that is merely mortal can
live without the death of sleep, so the gods who are without death
themselves have ordained it, to keep the memory of our mortality in our
minds, while we experience that as much as we live we die every day; in
which consideration I will ascend my bed, which I have nightly watered
with my tears since he that was the joy of it departed for that bad
city"--she so speaking because she could not bring her lips to name the
name of Troy so much hated. So for that night they parted, Penelope to
her bed and Ulysses to his son, and to the armour and the lances in the
hall, where they sat up all night cleaning and watching by the armour.
</chapter>
<chapter title="CHAPTER TEN">
The Madness from Above.--The Bow of Ulysses.--The Slaughter.--The
Conclusion.
When daylight appeared, a tumultuous concourse of the suitors again filled
the hall; and some wondered, and some inquired what meant that glittering
store of armour and lances which lay in heaps by the entry of the door;
and to all that asked Telemachus made reply that he had caused them to be
taken down to cleanse them of the rust and of the stain which they had
contracted by lying so long unused, even ever since his father went for
Troy; and with that answer their minds were easily satisfied. So to their
feasting and vain rioting again they fell. Ulysses, by Telemachus's order,
had a seat and a mess assigned him in the doorway, and he had his eye ever
on the lances. And it moved gall in some of the great ones there present
to have their feast still dulled with the society of that wretched beggar
as they deemed him, and they reviled and spurned at him with their feet.
Only there was one Philaetius, who had something a better nature than the
rest, that spake kindly to him, and had his age in respect. He, coming up
to Ulysses, took him by the hand with a kind of fear, as if touched
exceedingly with imagination of his great worth, and said thus to him,
"Hail father stranger! my brows have sweat to see the injuries which you
have received, and my eyes have broke forth in tears, when I have only
thought that, such being oftentimes the lot of worthiest men, to this
plight Ulysses may be reduced, and that he now may wander from place to
place as you do; for such who are compelled by need to range here and
there, and have no firm home to fix their feet upon, God keeps them in
this earth as under water; so are they kept down and depressed. And a dark
thread is sometimes spun in the fates of kings."
At this bare likening of the beggar to Ulysses, Minerva from heaven made
the suitors for foolish joy to go mad, and roused them to such a laughter
as would never stop--they laughed without power of ceasing, their eyes
stood full of tears for violent joys; but fears and horrible misgivings
succeeded; and one among them stood up and prophesied: "Ah, wretches!" he
said, "what madness from heaven has seized you, that you can laugh? see
you not that your meat drops blood? a night, like the night of death,
wraps you about; you shriek without knowing it; your eyes thrust forth
tears; the fixed walls, and the beam that bears the whole house up, fall
blood; ghosts choke up the entry; full is the hall with apparitions of
murdered men; under your feet is hell; the sun falls from heaven, and it
is midnight at noon." But like men whom the gods had infatuated to their
destruction, they mocked at his fears, and Eurymachus said, "This man is
surely mad; conduct him forth into the market-place, set him in the light,
for he dreams that 'tis night within the house."
But Theoclymenus (for that was the prophet's name), whom Minerva had
graced with a prophetic spirit, that he foreseeing might avoid the
destruction which awaited them, answered and said: "Eurymachus, I will not
require a guide of thee, for I have eyes and ears, the use of both my
feet, and a sane mind within me, and with these I will go forth of the
doors, because I know the imminent evils which await all you that stay, by
reason of this poor guest who is a favourite with all the gods." So
saying, he turned his back upon those inhospitable men, and went away
home, and never returned to the palace.
These words which he spoke were not unheard by Telemachus, who kept still
his eye upon his father, expecting fervently when he would give the sign
which was to precede the slaughter of the suitors.
They, dreaming of no such thing, fell sweetly to their dinner, as joying
in the great store of banquet which was heaped in full tables about them;
but there reigned not a bitterer banquet planet in all heaven than that
which hung over them this day by secret destination of Minerva.
There was a bow which Ulysses left when he went for Troy. It had lain by
since that time, out of use and unstrung, for no man had strength to draw
that bow, save Ulysses. So it had remained, as a monument of the great
strength of its master. This bow, with the quiver of arrows belonging
thereto, Telemachus had brought down from the armoury on the last night
along with the lances; and now Minerva, intending to do Ulysses an honour,
put it into the mind of Telemachus to propose to the suitors to try who
was strongest to draw that bow; and he promised that to the man who should
be able to draw that bow his mother should be given in marriage--Ulysses's
wife the prize to him who should bend the bow of Ulysses.
There was great strife and emulation stirred up among the suitors at those
words of the prince Telemachus. And to grace her son's words, and to
confirm the promise which he had made, Penelope came and showed herself
that day to the suitors; and Minerva made her that she appeared never so
comely in their sight as that day, and they were inflamed with the
beholding of so much beauty, proposed as the price of so great manhood;
and they cried out that if all those heroes who sailed to Colchis for the
rich purchase of the golden-fleeced ram had seen earth's richer prize,
Penelope, they would not have made their voyage, but would have vowed
their valours and their lives to her, for she was at all parts faultless.
And she said, "The gods have taken my beauty from me, since my lord went
for Troy." But Telemachus willed his mother to depart and not be present
at that contest; for he said, "It may be, some rougher strife shall chance
of this than may be expedient for a woman to witness." And she retired,
she and her maids, and left the hall.
Then the bow was brought into the midst, and a mark was set up by prince
Telemachus; and lord Antinous, as the chief among the suitors, had the
first offer; and he took the bow, and, fitting an arrow to the string, he
strove to bend it, but not with all his might and main could he once draw
together the ends of that tough bow; and when he found how vain a thing it
was to endeavour to draw Ulysses's bow, he desisted, blushing for shame
and for mere anger. Then Eurymachus adventured, but with no better
success; but as it had torn the hands of Antinous, so did the bow tear and
strain his hands, and marred his delicate fingers, yet could he not once
stir the string. Then called he to the attendants to bring fat and
unctuous matter, which melting at the fire, he dipped the bow therein,
thinking to supple it and make it more pliable; but not with all the helps
of art could he succeed in making it to move. After him Liodes, and
Amphinomus, and Polybus, and Eurynomus, and Polyctorides essayed their
strength, but not any one of them, or of the rest of those aspiring
suitors, had any better luck; yet not the meanest of them there but
thought himself well worthy of Ulysses's wife, though to shoot with
Ulysses's bow the completest champion among them was by proof found too
feeble.
Then Ulysses prayed that he might have leave to try; and immediately a
clamour was raised among the suitors, because of his petition, and they
scorned and swelled with rage at his presumption, and that a beggar should
seek to contend in a game of such noble mastery. But Telemachus ordered
that the bow should be given him, and that he should have leave to try,
since they had failed; "for," he said, "the bow is mine, to give or to
withhold;" and none durst gainsay the prince.
Then Ulysses gave a sign to his son, and he commanded the doors of the
hall to be made fast, and all wondered at his words, but none could divine
the cause. And Ulysses took the bow into his hands, and before he essayed
to bend it, he surveyed it at all parts, to see whether, by long lying by,
it had contracted any stiffness which hindered the drawing; and as he was
busied in the curious surveying of his bow, some of the suitors mocked
him, and said, "Past doubt this man is a right cunning archer, and knows
his craft well. See how he turns it over and over, and looks into it, as
if he could see through the wood." And others said, "We wish some one
would tell out gold into our laps but for so long a time as he shall be in
drawing of that string." But when he had spent some little time in making
proof of the bow, and had found it to be in good plight, like as a harper
in tuning of his harp draws out a string, with such ease or much more did
Ulysses draw to the head the string of his own tough bow, and in letting
of it go, it twanged with such a shrill noise as a swallow makes when it
sings through the air; which so much amazed the suitors that their colours
came and went, and the skies gave out a noise of thunder, which at heart
cheered Ulysses, for he knew that now his long labours by the disposal of
the Fates drew to an end. Then fitted he an arrow to the bow, and drawing
it to the head, he sent it right to the mark which the prince had set up.
Which done, he said to Telemachus, "You have got no disgrace yet by your
guest, for I have struck the mark I shot at, and gave myself no such
trouble in teasing the bow with fat and fire as these men did, but have
made proof that my strength is not impaired, nor my age so weak and
contemptible as these were pleased to think it. But come, the day going
down calls us to supper, after which succeed poem and harp, and all
delights which use to crown princely banquetings."
So saying, he beckoned to his son, who straight girt his sword to his
side, and took one of the lances (of which there lay great store from the
armoury) in his hand, and armed at all points advanced towards his father.
The upper rags which Ulysses wore fell from his shoulder, and his own
kingly likeness returned, when he rushed to the great hall door with bow
and quiver full of shafts, which down at his feet he poured, and in bitter
words presignified his deadly intent to the suitors. "Thus far," he said,
"this contest has been decided harmless: now for us there rests another
mark, harder to hit, but which my hands shall essay notwithstanding, if
Phoebus, god of archers, be pleased to give me the mastery." With that he
let fly a deadly arrow at Antinous, which pierced him in the throat, as he
was in the act of lifting a cup of wine to his mouth. Amazement seized the
suitors, as their great champion fell dead, and they raged highly against
Ulysses, and said that it should prove the dearest shaft which he ever let
fly, for he had slain a man whose like breathed not in any part of the
kingdom; and they flew to their arms, and would have seized the lances,
but Minerva struck them with dimness of sight that they went erring up and
down the hall, not knowing where to find them. Yet so infatuated were they
by the displeasure of Heaven that they did not see the imminent peril
which impended over them, but every man believed that this accident had
happened beside the intention of the doer. Fools! to think by shutting
their eyes to evade destiny, or that any other cup remained for them but
that which their great Antinous had tasted!
Then Ulysses revealed himself to all in that presence, and that he was the
man whom they held to be dead at Troy, whose palace they had usurped,
whose wife in his lifetime they had sought in impious marriage, and that
for this reason destruction was come upon them. And he dealt his deadly
arrows among them, and there was no avoiding him, nor escaping from his
horrid person; and Telemachus by his side plied them thick with those
murderous lances from which there was no retreat, till fear itself made
them valiant, and danger gave them eyes to understand the peril; then they
which had swords drew them, and some with shields, that could find them,
and some with tables and benches snatched up in haste, rose in a mass to
overwhelm and crush those two; yet they singly bestirred themselves like
men, and defended themselves against that great host, and through tables,
shields, and all, right through the arrows of Ulysses clove, and the
irresistible lances of Telemachus; and many lay dead, and all had wounds,
and Minerva in the likeness of a bird sat upon the beam which went across
the hall, clapping her wings with a fearful noise; and sometimes the great
bird would fly among them, cuffing at the swords and at the lances, and up
and down the hall would go, beating her wings, and troubling everything,
that it was frightful to behold, and it frayed the blood from the cheeks
of those heaven-hated suitors; but to Ulysses and his son she appeared in
her own divine similitude, with her snake-fringed shield, a goddess armed,
fighting their battles. Nor did that dreadful pair desist till they had
laid all their foes at their feet. At their feet they lay in shoals: like
fishes, when the fishermen break up their nets, so they lay gasping and
sprawling at the feet of Ulysses and his son. And Ulysses remembered the
prediction of Tiresias, which said that he was to perish by his own
guests, unless he slew those who knew him not.
[Illustration: _Rose in a mass to overwhelm and crush those two_.]
Then certain of the queen's household went up and told Penelope what had
happened, and how her lord Ulysses was come home, and had slain the
suitors. But she gave no heed to their words, but thought that some frenzy
possessed them, or that they mocked her; for it is the property of such
extremes of sorrow as she had felt not to believe when any great joy
cometh. And she rated and chid them exceedingly for troubling her. But
they the more persisted in their asseverations of the truth of what they
had affirmed; and some of them had seen the slaughtered bodies of the
suitors dragged forth of the hall. And they said, "That poor guest whom
you talked with last night was Ulysses." Then she was yet more fully
persuaded that they mocked her, and she wept. But they said, "This thing
is true which we have told. We sat within, in an inner room in the palace,
and the doors of the hall were shut on us, but we heard the cries and the
groans of the men that were killed, but saw nothing, till at length your
son called to us to come in, and entering we saw Ulysses standing in the
midst of the slaughtered." But she, persisting in her unbelief, said that
it was some god which had deceived them to think it was the person of
Ulysses.
By this time Telemachus and his father had cleansed their hands from the
slaughter, and were come to where the queen was talking with those of her
household; and when she saw Ulysses, she stood motionless, and had no
power to speak, sudden surprise and joy and fear and many passions so
strove within her. Sometimes she was clear that it was her husband that
she saw, and sometimes the alteration which twenty years had made in his
person (yet that was not much) perplexed her that she knew not what to
think, and for joy she could not believe, and yet for joy she would not
but believe; and, above all, that sudden change from a beggar to a king
troubled her, and wrought uneasy scruples in her mind. But Telemachus,
seeing her strangeness, blamed her, and called her an ungentle and
tyrannous mother; and said that she showed a too great curiousness of
modesty, to abstain from embracing his father, and to have doubts of his
person, when to all present it was evident that he was the very real and
true Ulysses.
Then she mistrusted no longer, but ran and fell upon Ulysses's neck, and
said, "Let not my husband be angry, that I held off so long with strange
delays; it is the gods, who severing us for so long time, have caused this
unseemly distance in me. If Menelaus's wife had used half my caution, she
would never have taken so freely to a stranger's bed; and she might have
spared us all these plagues which have come upon us through her shameless
deed."
These words with which Penelope excused herself wrought more affection in
Ulysses than if upon a first sight she had given up herself implicitly to
his embraces; and he wept for joy to possess a wife so discreet, so
answering to his own staid mind, that had a depth of wit proportioned to
his own, and one that held chaste virtue at so high a price; and he
thought the possession of such a one cheaply purchased with the loss of
all Circe's delights and Calypso's immortality of joys; and his long
labours and his severe sufferings past seemed as nothing, now they were
crowned with the enjoyment of his virtuous and true wife Penelope. And as
sad men at sea whose ship has gone to pieces nigh shore, swimming for
their lives, all drenched in foam and brine, crawl up to some poor patch
of land, which they take possession of with as great a joy as if they had
the world given them in fee, with such delight did this chaste wife cling
to her lord restored, till the dark night fast coming on reminded her of
that more intimate and happy union when in her long-widowed bed she should
once again clasp a living Ulysses.
So from that time the land had rest from the suitors. And the happy
Ithacans with songs and solemn sacrifices of praise to the gods celebrated
the return of Ulysses; for he that had been so long absent was returned to
wreak the evil upon the heads of the doers; in the place where they had
done the evil, there wreaked he his vengeance upon them.
</chapter>
<End of Project Gutenberg's The Adventures of Ulysses, by Charles Lamb>
</text>
